NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 1800-35
Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture:
High-Level Document
| Oliver Borchert  | Brian Butler  | Madhu Dodda  | Mitchell Lewars  |
| ---------------- | ------------- | ------------ | ---------------- |
Gema Howell  Mike Delaguardia  Tim LeMaster  Bryan Rosensteel
| Alper Kerman  | Matthew Hyatt   | Lookout  | Ping Identity  |
| ------------- | --------------- | -------- | -------------- |
| Scott Rose    | Randy Martin    |          |                |
Ken Durbin
| Murugiah Souppaya  | Peter Romness  |     | Don Coltrain  |
| ------------------ | -------------- | --- | ------------- |
James Elliott
| National Institute of  | Cisco  |     | Wade Ellery  |
| ---------------------- | ------ | --- | ------------ |
Earl Matthews
| Standards and Technology  |     |               | Deborah McGinn  |
| ------------------------- | --- | ------------- | --------------- |
|                           |     | David Pricer  | Radiant Logic   |
Corey Bonnell
| Jason Ajmo  |     | Mandiant  |     |
| ----------- | --- | --------- | --- |
Dean Coclin
Yemi Fashina
|                 | DigiCert  |            | Frank Briguglio  |
| --------------- | --------- | ---------- | ---------------- |
| Parisa Grayeli  |           | Joey Cruz  |                  |
Ryan Tighe
| Joseph Hunt  |               | Tarek Dawoud  |            |
| ------------ | ------------- | ------------- | ---------- |
|              | Ryan Johnson  |               | SailPoint  |
Carmichael Patton
Jason Hurlburt
Dung Lam
| Nedu Irrechukwu  |                 | Alex Pavlovsky   |               |
| ---------------- | --------------- | ---------------- | ------------- |
|                  | Darwin Tolbert  |                  | Chris Jensen  |
Brandon Stephenson
Joshua Klosterman
|                  | F5  |              | Joshua Moll  |
| ---------------- | --- | ------------ | ------------ |
| Oksana Slivina   |     | Clay Taylor  |              |
Tenable
Microsoft
| Susan Symington  | Tim Jones  |     |     |
| ---------------- | ---------- | --- | --- |
Allen Tan
|                        | Tom May  | Bob Lyons  |              |
| ---------------------- | -------- | ---------- | ------------ |
| The MITRE Corporation  |          |            | Jason White  |
Forescout
|                         |                     | Vinu Panicker  | Trellix, Public Sector  |
| ----------------------- | ------------------- | -------------- | ----------------------- |
| Karen Scarfone          |                     | Okta           |                         |
| Scarfone Cybersecurity  | Christopher Altman  |                |                         |
Joe Brown
|     | Alex Bauer  | Peter Bjork  | Gary Bradt  |
| --- | ----------- | ------------ | ----------- |
William Barker
|     | Marco Genovese  | Hans Drolshagen  | Zimperium  |
| --- | --------------- | ---------------- | ---------- |
Dakota Consulting
Google Cloud
Omnissa
Peter Gallagher
Jeffrey Adorno
|                | Andrew Campagna  | Imran Bashir  |           |
| -------------- | ---------------- | ------------- | --------- |
| Aaron Palermo  |                  |               | Syed Ali  |
| Appgate        | John Dombroski   | Ali Haider    |           |
Bob Smith
|     | Adam Frank   | Nishit Kothari  |     |
| --- | ------------ | --------------- | --- |
Zscaler
Madhu Balaji
|     | Nalini Kannan   | Sean Morgan  |     |
| --- | --------------- | ------------ | --- |
Adam Cerini
|     | Priti Patil  | Seetal Patel  |     |
| --- | ------------ | ------------- | --- |
Rajarshi Das
|     | Harmeet Singh  | Norman Wong  |     |
| --- | -------------- | ------------ | --- |
AWS (Amazon Web Services)
|                | Mike Spisak         | Palo Alto Networks  |     |
| -------------- | ------------------- | ------------------- | --- |
| Jacob Barosin  | Krishna Yellepeddy  |                     |     |
Zack Austin
| Kyle Black  | IBM  |     |     |
| ----------- | ---- | --- | --- |
Shawn Higgins
Scott Gordon
Rob Woodworth
| Jerry Haskins  | Nicholas Herrmann  |           |     |
| -------------- | ------------------ | --------- | --- |
|                | Corey Lund         | PC Matic  |     |
Keith Luck
| Dale McKay  | Farhan Saifudin  |     |     |
| ----------- | ---------------- | --- | --- |
Ivanti
Sunjeet Randhawa
Broadcom
June 2025

FINAL

This publication is available free of charge from https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-35

DISCLAIMER
Certain commercial entities, equipment, products, or materials may be identified by name or company
logo or other insignia in order to acknowledge their participation in this collaboration or to describe an
experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply special
status or relationship with NIST or recommendation or endorsement by NIST or NCCoE; neither is it
intended to imply that the entities, equipment, products, or materials are necessarily the best available
for the purpose.
National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 1800-35, Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol.
Spec. Publ. 1800-35, 55 pages, (June 2025), CODEN: NSPUE2
NIST TECHNICAL SERIES POLICIES
Copyright, Use, and Licensing Statements
NIST Technical Series Publication Identifier Syntax
AUTHOR ORCID IDS
Oliver Borchert: 0009-0006-1880-0542
Gema Howell: 0000-0002-0428-5045
Alper Kerman: 0009-0000-5880-8369
Scott Rose: 0000-0002-3105-7427
Murugiah Souppaya: 0000-0002-8055-8527
Karen Scarfone: 0000-0001-6334-9486
William Barker: 0000-0002-4113-8861
FEEDBACK
You can view or download the final guide at the NCCoE ZTA project page.
Comments on this publication may be submitted to: nccoe-zta-project@list.nist.gov.
All comments are subject to release under the Freedom of Information Act.
National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence
National Institute of Standards and Technology
100 Bureau Drive
Mailstop 2002
Gaithersburg, MD 20899
Email: nccoe@nist.gov
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture ii

NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY CENTER OF EXCELLENCE
The National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE), a part of the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST), is a collaborative hub where industry organizations, government agencies, and
academic institutions work together to address businesses’ most pressing cybersecurity issues. This
public-private partnership enables the creation of practical cybersecurity solutions for specific
industries, as well as for broad, cross-sector technology challenges. Through consortia under
Cooperative Research and Development Agreements (CRADAs), including technology partners—from
Fortune 50 market leaders to smaller companies specializing in information technology security—the
NCCoE applies standards and best practices to develop modular, adaptable example cybersecurity
solutions using commercially available technology. The NCCoE documents these example solutions in
the NIST Special Publication 1800 series, which maps capabilities to the NIST Cybersecurity Framework
and details the steps needed for another entity to re-create the example solution. The NCCoE was
established in 2012 by NIST in partnership with the State of Maryland and Montgomery County,
Maryland.
To learn more about the NCCoE, visit https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/. To learn more about NIST, visit
https://www.nist.gov.
NIST CYBERSECURITY PRACTICE GUIDES
NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guides (Special Publication 1800 series) target specific cybersecurity
challenges in the public and private sectors. They are practical, user-friendly guides that facilitate the
adoption of standards-based approaches to cybersecurity. They show members of the information
security community how to implement example solutions that help them align with relevant standards
and best practices and provide users with the materials lists, configuration files, and other information
they need to implement a similar approach.
The documents in this series describe example implementations of cybersecurity practices that
businesses and other organizations may voluntarily adopt. These documents do not describe regulations
or mandatory practices, nor do they carry statutory authority.
ABSTRACT
A zero trust architecture (ZTA) enables secure authorized access to enterprise resources that are
distributed across on-premises and multiple cloud environments, while enabling a hybrid workforce and
partners to access resources from anywhere, at any time, from any device in support of the
organization’s mission. This NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guide explains how organizations can
implement ZTA consistent with the concepts and principles outlined in NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-
207, Zero Trust Architecture. The NCCoE worked with 24 collaborators under Cooperative Research and
Development Agreements (CRADAs) to integrate commercially available technology to build 19 ZTA
example implementations and demonstrate a number of common use cases. The Guide includes
detailed technical information on each example ZTA implementation, providing models that
organizations can emulate. The guide also summarizes best practices and lessons learned from the
implementations and integrations to make it easier and more cost-effective to implement ZTA.
Additionally, this guide includes mappings of ZTA principles and technologies to commonly used security
standards and guidelines.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture iii

KEYWORDS
enhanced identity governance (EIG); identity, credential, and access management (ICAM);
microsegmentation; secure access service edge (SASE); software-defined perimeter (SDP); zero trust; zero
trust architecture (ZTA).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to the following individuals for their generous contributions of expertise and time.
 Appgate: Jason Garbis, Adam Rose, Jonathan Roy
 AWS (Amazon Web Services): Conrad Fernandes*, Harrison Holstein, Quint Van Deman
 Broadcom: Andrew Babakian*, Genc Domi*, Paul Mancuso, Eric Michael, Dennis Moreau*,
Wayne Pauley*, Jacob Rapp*, Lewis Shepherd
 Cisco: Ken Andrews, Robert Bui, Leo Lebel, Tom Oast, Aaron Rodriguez, Kelly Sennett, Steve
Vetter, Micah Wilson
 F5: Daniel Cayer, David Clark, Jay Kelley, Darrell Pierson
 Forescout: Yejin Jang*, Neal Lucier*
 Google Cloud: Tim Knudson*
 IBM: Nilesh Atal, Himanshu Gupta, Lakshmeesh Hegde, Sharath Math, Naveen Murthy, Nikhil
Shah, Deepa Shetty, Harishkumar Somashekaraiah
 IT Coalition: Aaron Cook, Vahid Esfahani*, Jeff Laclair, Ebadullah Siddiqui*, Musumani Woods*
 Ivanti: Patty Arcano, Jeffery Burton, Jay Dineshkumar
 Lookout: Tyler Croak, Jeff Gilhool, Hashim Khan*
 Microsoft: Thomas Detzner, Ehud Itshaki, Janet Jones, Hemma Prafullchandra*, Enrique
Saggese, Sarah Young
 MITRE: Eileen Division*, Spike E. Dog*, Sallie Edwards*, Ayayidjin Gabiam, Jolene Loveless*,
Karri Meldorf, Kenneth Sandlin, Lauren Swan, Jessica Walton*
 NIST: Mike Bartock, Julie Chua, Douglas Montgomery, Cherilyn Pascoe, Michael Powell, Kevin
Stine
 Okta: Brian Dack, Sean Frazier, Naveed Mirza, Kelsey Nelson, Ron Wilson
 Omnissa: Keith Luck*
 PC Matic: Andy Tuch
 Ping Identity: Ivan Anderson, Aubrey Turner
 Radiant Logic: Bill Baz, Rusty Deaton, John Petrutiu, Lauren Selby
 SailPoint: Peter Amaral, Jim Russell, Esteban Soto
 Tenable: Jeremiah Stallcup
 Zimperium: Dan Butzer, Jim Kovach*, Kern Smith
 Zscaler: Jeremy James, Lisa Lorenzin*, Matt Moulton, Patrick Perry
* Former employee; all work for this publication was done while at that organization
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture iv

Special thanks to all who reviewed and provided feedback on this document.
The Technology Collaborators who participated in this project submitted their capabilities in response to
a notice in the Federal Register. Respondents with relevant capabilities or product components were
invited to sign a Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) with NIST, allowing them
to participate in a consortium to build this example solution.1  We worked with:
Technology Collaborators
| Appgate       | IBM                 | PC Matic       |
| ------------- | ------------------- | -------------- |
| AWS           | Ivanti              | Ping Identity  |
| Broadcom      | Lookout             | Radiant Logic  |
| Cisco         | Mandiant            | SailPoint      |
| DigiCert      | Microsoft           | Tenable        |
| F5            | Okta                | Trellix        |
| Forescout     | Omnissa             | Zimperium      |
| Google Cloud  | Palo Alto Networks  | Zscaler        |

DOCUMENT CONVENTIONS
The terms “shall” and “shall not” indicate requirements to be followed strictly to conform to the
publication and from which no deviation is permitted. The terms “should” and “should not” indicate that
among several possibilities, one is recommended as particularly suitable without mentioning or
excluding others, or that a certain course of action is preferred but not necessarily required, or that (in
the negative form) a certain possibility or course of action is discouraged but not prohibited. The terms
“may” and “need not” indicate a course of action permissible within the limits of the publication. The
terms “can” and “cannot” indicate a possibility and capability, whether material, physical, or causal.
|     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- |

1 Note that after the VMware End User Computing division products were implemented at the NCCoE, VMware
was acquired by Broadcom, and then the VMware End User Computing Division was divested and reformed under
a new entity, Omnissa LLC. Symantec was also previously acquired by Broadcom.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture  v

PATENT DISCLOSURE NOTICE
NOTICE: The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) has requested that holders of patent
claims whose use may be required for compliance with the guidance or requirements of this
publication disclose such patent claims to ITL. However, holders of patents are not obligated to
respond to ITL calls for patents and ITL has not undertaken a patent search in order to identify
which, if any, patents may apply to this publication.
As of the date of publication and following call(s) for the identification of patent claims whose
use may be required for compliance with the guidance or requirements of this publication, no
such patent claims have been identified to ITL.
No representation is made or implied by ITL that licenses are not required to avoid patent
infringement in the use of this publication.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 2

Contents
1 Introduction to the Guide..................................................................... 2
1.1 Audience ........................................................................................................................ 2
1.2 Scope ............................................................................................................................. 2
1.3 How to Use This Guide .................................................................................................. 2
2 Project Overview .................................................................................. 4
2.1 Motivation for the Project ............................................................................................. 4
2.2 Challenges in Implementing ZTA ................................................................................... 4
2.3 Collaborators and Their Contributions .......................................................................... 6
3 Architecture and Builds ........................................................................ 6
3.1 General ZTA Reference Architecture ............................................................................ 7
3.2 EIG Crawl Phase Reference Architecture ...................................................................... 9
3.3 EIG Run Phase Reference Architecture ....................................................................... 10
3.4 SDP, Microsegmentation, and SASE Reference Architecture ..................................... 10
3.5 ZTA Laboratory Physical Architecture ......................................................................... 11
3.6 Builds Implemented .................................................................................................... 12
4 Build Implementation Instructions ..................................................... 16
5 General Findings ................................................................................ 19
5.1 EIG Crawl Phase Findings ............................................................................................ 19
5.2 EIG Run Phase Findings ............................................................................................... 20
5.3 SDP, Microsegmentation, and SASE Phase Findings ................................................... 22
6 Functional Demonstrations ................................................................ 23
6.1 Demonstration Methodology ...................................................................................... 23
6.2 Demonstration Use Cases ........................................................................................... 24
6.2.1 Use Case A: Discovery and Identification ................................................................... 24
6.2.2 Use Case B: Enterprise-ID Access ................................................................................ 25
6.2.3 Use Case C: Collaboration: Federated-ID Access ........................................................ 25
6.2.4 Use Case D: Other-ID Access ....................................................................................... 26
6.2.5 Use Case E: Guest: No-ID Access................................................................................. 26
6.2.6 Use Case F: Confidence Level ...................................................................................... 27
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 3

6.2.7 Use Case G: Service-Service Interaction ..................................................................... 28
6.2.8 Use Case H: Data Level Security Scenarios ................................................................. 28
6.3 Functional Demonstration Results .............................................................................. 29
6.3.1 Demonstration Result Summaries .............................................................................. 29
6.3.2 Demonstration Results in Full ..................................................................................... 31
7 Risk and Compliance Management .................................................... 33
7.1 Risks Addressed by the ZTA Reference Architecture .................................................. 33
7.2 ZTA Security Mappings ................................................................................................ 35
8 Zero Trust Journey Takeaways ........................................................... 36
8.1 Discover and Inventory the Existing Environment ...................................................... 36
8.2 Formulate Access Policy to Support the Mission and Business Use Cases ................. 37
8.3 Identify Existing Security Capabilities and Technology ............................................... 38
8.4 Eliminate Gaps in Zero Trust Policy and Processes by Applying a Risk-Based Approach
Based on the Value of Data ......................................................................................... 38
8.5 Implement ZTA Components (People, Process, and Technology) and Incrementally
Leverage Deployed Security Solutions ........................................................................ 39
8.6 Verify the Implementation to Support Zero Trust Outcomes ..................................... 39
8.7 Continuously Improve and Evolve Due to Changes in Threat Landscape, Mission,
Technology, and Requirements .................................................................................. 40
Appendix A List of Acronyms .................................................................. 41
Appendix B References .......................................................................... 44
Appendix C Change Log .......................................................................... 45
List of Figures
Figure 3-1 General ZTA Reference Architecture ...................................................................................8
Figure 3-2 EIG Crawl Phase Reference Architecture ........................................................................... 10
Figure 3-3 Physical Architecture of ZTA Lab ....................................................................................... 11
List of Tables
Table 4-1 Mapping of Builds to Online Details Regarding Architecture Descriptions and
Implementation Instructions ............................................................................................................ 17
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 4

Table 6-1 Mapping of Builds to Online Details Regarding Architecture Descriptions and Functional
Demonstration Results ..................................................................................................................... 31
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 5

Executive Summary
A zero trust architecture (ZTA) is an enterprise cybersecurity architecture that is based on zero trust
principles, such as those outlined in NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-207, Zero Trust Architecture [1],
and that is designed to prevent data breaches and limit internal lateral movement. A ZTA can help your
organization protect its data and resources no matter where they are located. A ZTA can also enable
your workforce, contractors, partners, and other authorized parties to securely access the data and
resources they need from anywhere at any time. ZTA implements a risk-based approach to
cybersecurity—continuously evaluating and verifying conditions and requests to decide which access
requests should be permitted, then ensuring that each access is properly safeguarded commensurate
with risk. Because of their effectiveness against both internal and external threats, this architecture is
increasingly being adopted, and some organizations are required to use a ZTA.
There is no single approach for each organization to migrate to ZTA. Therefore, the NIST National
Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE) worked with 24 technology providers to demonstrate
practical implementation of ZTA principles from NIST SP 800-207. Together, we have built and
implemented 19 example ZTA solutions in lab environments, leveraging the technology from our
collaborators. For each of the example ZTAs, we have outlined detailed technical information, including
architecture, sample technologies leveraged, specific configurations and integrations of technologies,
and use cases and scenarios demonstrated.
We have also created mappings between the example ZTA security capabilities and the NIST
Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) versions 1.1 and 2.0 [2][3], NIST SP 800-53r5 [4], and NIST critical
software security measures. These mappings were developed to support why and how organizations can
implement ZTA.
This guide is intended to help your organization gradually evolve existing environments and technologies
into a ZTA over time. It provides practical information that you can use to develop your ZTA roadmap,
including models you can emulate and examples of how to best leverage existing technology
infrastructure. The lessons we have learned from our demonstrations can benefit your organization by
saving time and resources.
By utilizing this guide, your organization can be better positioned to implement a ZTA that achieves the
following:
 Supports user access to resources regardless of user location or device (managed or
unmanaged)
 Protects sensitive information and other business assets and processes regardless of their
location (on-premises or cloud-based)
 Limits breaches by making it harder for attackers to move through an environment and by
addressing the insider threat (insiders are not automatically trusted)
 Performs continuous, real-time monitoring, logging, and risk-based assessment and
enforcement of corporate policy
This high-level document serves as introductory reading with insight into the project effort. For in-depth
details, please refer to the full document in web format.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 1

1 Introduction to the Guide
This paper outlines the guidelines for organizations as they implement zero trust architecture (ZTA). The
implementation best practices and lessons learned were identified through a collaborative project at the
NCCoE that developed, demonstrated, and documented example ZTAs. The NCCoE and its collaborators
have used commercially available technology in lab environments to build 19 interoperable, open
standards-based ZTA implementations (“builds”) that align with the concepts and principles in NIST SP
800-207, Zero Trust Architecture [1]. The implementations include ZTA approaches for enhanced identity
governance (EIG), software-defined perimeter (SDP), microsegmentation, and secure access service
edge (SASE).
1.1 Audience
The primary audience for this guide is organizations looking to implement ZTA. The document assumes
an existing level of cybersecurity knowledge and capabilities to deploy ZTA components and supporting
components for data security, endpoint security, identity and access management, and security
analytics. The enterprises are also assumed to have critical resources that require protection, some of
which are located on-premises and others of which are in the cloud; and a requirement to provide
partners, contractors, guests, and employees, both local and remote, with secure access to these critical
resources. For a full list of assumptions for this project, see our supplemental Assumptions
documentation. This paper is not specific to federal agency audiences.
Readers of this guide should already be familiar with ZTA basics and the topics covered in NIST SP 800-
207, Zero Trust Architecture [1].
1.2 Scope
The scope of this guide is implementing a ZTA for a conventional, general-purpose enterprise IT
infrastructure with support for traditional IT resources such as laptops, desktops, servers, mobile
devices, and other systems with credentials. Discovery of resources, assets, communication flows, and
other elements is also within scope. The focus is on using the ZTA to protect access to enterprise data,
regardless of who initiates the access request (e.g., enterprise employees, partners, contractors, or
corporate network guests), from where the access request is initiated (e.g., from the corporate network,
a branch office, or the public internet), or where the resources are located (e.g., on-premises or in the
cloud).
ZTA for industrial control systems, operational technology (OT) environments, and Internet of Things
(IoT) devices are explicitly out of scope for this project. For information on other related NCCoE projects,
see [5][6]. Addressing the risk and policy requirements of discovering and classifying data [7] is also out
of scope.
1.3 How to Use This Guide
This guide offers two content formats: the “High-Level Document in PDF Format” (this document) and
the “Full Document in Web Format.” The document in PDF format is meant to serve as an introduction
to the project, including a high-level summary of the project goals, ZTA reference architecture, ZTA
implementations, and findings. The document in the web format provides in-depth details in terms of
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 2

technologies leveraged, their specific integrations and configurations, and the use cases and scenarios
demonstrated. The web format document also contains information on the implemented security
capabilities and their mappings to the NIST CSF versions 1.1 and 2.0 [2][3], NIST SP 800-53r5 [4], and
NIST critical software security measures.
Readers are encouraged to begin by reading the document in PDF format (this document) to gain high-
level insight into the project. Readers may then drill down from this document into the deeper sections
of the linked online document in web format to access in-depth information as needed. Therefore, this
document is organized as follows:
 Section 2 provides an overview of the NCCoE’s “Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture” project
from the viewpoints of motivation for the project, challenges in implementing ZTA, project
execution and implementation approach, as well as collaborating organizations and their
contributions to the project.
 Section 3 discusses the reference architectures considered for demonstrating various types of
ZTA deployment approaches used across the 19 implementations built. It also lists the
technology products, along with out-of-the-box capabilities used in each build. Furthermore,
this section provides information regarding the NCCoE lab’s physical architecture platform used
to implement the builds.
 Section 4 lists 19 example implementations in a table format with relevant columns that identify
technology products and capabilities used as “Policy Engines/Policy Decision Points,” as well as
ZTA deployment approaches used in each implementation. Also, additional table columns
provide links to details available in web format with respect to build architecture, technologies
used, and flow diagrams, including instructions for each implementation.
 Section 5 explores the noteworthy findings and conclusions recorded throughout the
demonstration of each ZTA deployment approach across 19 unique lab implementations.
 Section 6 discusses the essence of functional demonstrations scoped for the project from the
viewpoints of demonstration methodology, use cases, and scenarios. It also lists the functional
demonstration results for each implementation, both in summary and fully detailed formats.
 Section 7 provides information regarding each build’s implemented security capabilities and
their mappings to the NIST CSF versions 1.1 and 2.0, NIST SP 800-53r5, and NIST critical software
security measures.
 Section 8 concludes this document by sharing a list of takeaways as recommended steps for a
zero trust journey, intended for organizations that are considering ZTA adoption for their
environments.
ZTA implementers and others seeking detailed information on designing and deploying ZTA solutions are
encouraged to read all sections of the guide, as well as utilize the wealth of additional resources linked
to throughout those sections.
Cybersecurity professionals, compliance professionals, and others who are primarily concerned with
how ZTA solutions relate to the CSF, NIST SP 800-53, and NIST critical software security measures should
focus on Section 7 and the resources it links to.
Anyone interested primarily in the lessons learned from the project should focus on the takeaways
provided in Section 8.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 3

2 Project Overview
2.1 Motivation for the Project
Protecting enterprise data and resources has become increasingly challenging. Many users need access
from anywhere, at any time, from any device to support the organization’s mission. Data is created,
stored, transmitted, and processed across different organizations’ environments, which are distributed
across on-premises and multiple clouds to meet ever-evolving business use cases. It is no longer feasible
to simply protect data and resources at the perimeter of the enterprise environment or to assume that
all users, devices, applications, and services within it can be trusted.
A ZTA enables secure authorized access to assets—machines, applications, and services running on
them, and associated data and resources—whether located on-premises or in the cloud, for a hybrid
workforce and partners based on an organization’s defined access policy. For each access request, ZTA
explicitly verifies the context available at access time—this includes both static user profile information
or non-person entity information, such as the requester’s identity and role; and dynamic information,
such as geolocation, the requesting device’s health and credentials, the sensitivity of the resource,
access pattern anomalies, and whether the request is warranted and in accordance with the
organization’s business process logic. If the defined policy is met, a secure session is created to protect
all information transferred to and from the resource. A real-time, risk-based assessment of resource
access and access pattern anomaly detection with continuous policy evaluation is performed to
establish and maintain the access. A ZTA can also protect organizations from non-organizational
resources that their users and applications may connect to, helping to stop threats originating from
outside of the organization’s control.
NCCoE has collaborated with ZTA technology providers to build numerous example ZTA solutions and
demonstrate their ability to meet the tenets of ZTA described in NIST SP 800-207. The goal of the
solutions is to enforce corporate security policy dynamically and in near-real-time to restrict access to
authenticated, authorized users, devices, and non-person entities while flexibly supporting a complex
set of business outcomes involving both remote and on-premises workforces, use of the cloud, partner
collaboration, and support for contractors. The example solutions are designed to demonstrate the
ability to protect against and detect attacks and malicious insiders. They showcase the ability of ZTA
products to interoperate with existing enterprise and cloud technologies while trying to minimize the
impact on end-user experience.
The project can help organizations plan how to evolve their existing enterprise environments to ZTA,
starting with an assessment of their current resources, strengths, and weaknesses, and setting
milestones along a path of continuous improvement, gradually bringing them closer to achieving the ZTA
goals they have prioritized based on risk, cost, resources, and their unique mission. The goal is to enable
organizations to thoughtfully apply ZTA controls that best protect their business while enabling them to
operate as they need to.
2.2 Challenges in Implementing ZTA
Throughout this project, numerous challenges organizations may face in implementing ZTA have been
identified, including the following:
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 4

 Organization buy-in and support, such as:
Perception that ZTA is suited only for large organizations and requires significant
o
investment, rather than understanding that ZTA is a set of guiding principles suitable for
organizations of any size
Concern that ZTA might negatively impact the operation of the environment or end-user
o
experience
Lack of resources to develop necessary policies and a pilot or proof-of-concept
o
implementation needed to inform a transition plan
Leveraging existing investments and balancing priorities while making progress toward a
o
ZTA via modernization initiatives
Lack of understanding regarding what additional skills and training administrators,
o
security personnel, operators, end users, and policy decision-makers may require
 Missing foundational pieces, such as:
Lack of adequate asset inventory and management needed to fully understand the
o
business applications, assets, and processes that need to be protected, with no clear
understanding of the criticality of these resources
Lack of adequate digital definition, management, and tracking of user roles across the
o
organization needed to enforce fine-grained, need-to-know access policy for specific
applications and services
Lack of visibility of the organization’s communications and usage patterns—limited
o
understanding of the transactions that occur between an organization’s subjects, assets,
applications, and services, and absence of the data necessary to identify these
communications and their specific flows
Lack of information regarding everything that encompasses the organization’s attack
o
surface. Organizations can usually address threats with traditional security tools in the
layers that they currently manage and maintain, such as networks and applications, but
elements of a ZTA may extend beyond their normal purview.
 Technical challenges, such as:
Integrating various types of commercially available technologies of varying maturities,
o
assessing capabilities, and identifying technology gaps to build a ZTA
Lack of a standardized mechanism to distribute, manage, and enforce security policy,
o
causing organizations to face a fragmented policy environment
Lack of common understanding and language of ZTA across the community and within
o
the organization, gauging the organization’s ZTA maturity, determining which ZTA
approach is most suitable for the business, and developing an implementation plan
There is not a single ZTA that fits all. ZTAs need to be designed and implemented for each organization
based on the organization’s requirements and risk tolerance, as well as its existing invested technologies
and environments. The appropriate logical architecture for a given organization’s ZTA will depend on
that organization’s requirements and technologies.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 5

2.3 Collaborators and Their Contributions
The NCCoE prepared a Federal Register Notice [8] inviting technology providers to provide products
and/or expertise to compose example ZTAs. Cooperative Research and Development Agreements
(CRADAs) were established with qualified respondents. Collaborators’ components have been composed
into numerous example implementations (i.e., builds). With 24 collaborators participating in the project,
the build teams that were assembled sometimes included vendors that offered overlapping capabilities.
We made an effort to showcase capabilities from each vendor when possible. In other cases, we
consulted with the collaborators to have them work out a solution.
Each of the technology partners and collaborators participating in the project has provided descriptions
of the relevant products and capabilities they bring to this ZTA effort. The descriptions can be found in
our supplemental documentation of Collaborators and Their Contributions.
The NCCoE does not certify, validate, or endorse products or services. We demonstrate the capabilities
that can be achieved by using participants’ contributed technology. Your organization’s information
security experts should identify the products that will best integrate with your existing tools and IT
system infrastructure. Your organization can adopt this solution or one that adheres to these guidelines
entirely, or you can use this guide as a starting point for tailoring and implementing parts of a solution.
3 Architecture and Builds
This project began with a clean laboratory environment that we populated with various applications and
services that would be expected in a typical enterprise to create several baseline enterprise
architectures. Examples include security information and event management systems (SIEMs),
vulnerability scanning and assessment tools, security validation tools, and discovery tools.
Next, we used a phased approach to develop example ZTA solutions. This approach was designed to
represent how we believe most enterprises will evolve their enterprise architecture toward ZTA, i.e., by
starting with their already-existing enterprise environment and gradually adding or adapting capabilities.
Our first implementations with minimum viable solutions were EIG deployments because the identity-
based controls provided by EIG are foundational components of ZTA. We called this phase of the project
the EIG crawl phase, which did not include cloud capabilities, and it was followed by the EIG run phase,
where we added cloud capabilities.
We gradually deployed additional functional components and capabilities to address an increasing
number of ZTA requirements and deployed microsegmentation, SDP, and SASE approaches.
Given the importance of discovery to the successful implementation of a ZTA, we initially deployed it to
continuously observe the environment and use those observations to audit and validate the
documented baseline map on an ongoing basis. Because we had instantiated the baseline environment
ourselves, we already had a good initial understanding of it. However, we were able to use the discovery
tools to audit and validate what we deployed and provisioned, correlate known data with information
reported by the tools, and use the tool outputs to formulate an initial zero trust policy, ultimately
ensuring that observed network flows correlate to static policies.
The builds described in this document are examples with the understanding that there is no single
approach for migrating to ZTA that is best for all enterprises; ZTA is a set of concepts and principles, not
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 6

a set of technical specifications that can be complied with. The objective, instead, is continuous
improvement of access control processes and policies in accordance with the principles of ZTA
This section provides information on the project’s ZTA builds and the underlying architectures they
implemented.
3.1 General ZTA Reference Architecture
Figure 3-1 depicts the high-level logical architecture of a general ZTA reference design. It consists of
three types of core components: Policy Engine (PE), Policy Administrator (PA), and Policy Enforcement
Point (PEP), as well as several supporting components that assist the policy engine in making its
decisions by providing data and policy rules related to areas such as identity, credential, and access
management (ICAM); endpoint security; security analytics; data security; and resource protection.
Specific capabilities that fall into each of these supporting component categories are discussed in more
detail in our supplemental documentation for General ZTA Reference Architecture. The various sets of
information, either generated via policy or collected by the supporting components and used as input to
ZTA policy decisions, are referred to as policy information points (PIPs). Although the simplicity of the
architecture may seem to imply that the supporting components are simple plug-ins that respond in
real-time to the PDP, in many cases, the ICAM, endpoint detection and response (EDR)/endpoint
protection platform (EPP), security analytics, and data security PIPs will each represent complex
infrastructures. Some ZTA logical component functions may be performed by multiple hardware or
software components, or a single software component may perform multiple logical functions.
Subjects (human users, devices, applications, servers, and other non-human entities that request
information from resources on premises or in the cloud) request and receive access to enterprise
resources via the ZTA. Human subjects are authenticated. Non-human subjects are both authenticated
and protected by endpoint security. Enterprise resources may be located on-premises or in the cloud.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 7

Figure 3-1 General ZTA Reference Architecture
An enterprise ZTA may have numerous PEPs and PDPs. For simplicity, however, Figure 3-1 limits its focus
to the interactions involving a single PDP, a single PEP, a single subject, and a single resource. The
labeled arrows in Figure 3-1 depict the high-level steps performed in support of the ZTA reference
architecture. These steps can be understood in terms of three separate processes:
 Resource Management—R(): Resource management steps ensure that the resource is
authenticated and that its endpoint conforms to enterprise policy. Upon first being brought
online, a resource’s identity is authenticated, and its endpoint hygiene (i.e., health) is verified.
The resource is then connected to the PEP. Once connected to the PEP, access to the resource is
granted only through that PEP at the discretion of the PDP. For as long as the resource continues
to be online, resource management steps are performed to periodically reauthenticate the
resource and verify its endpoint hygiene, thereby continually monitoring its health. These steps
are labeled R(1) and R(A) through R(D). Step R(1) occurs first, but the other steps do not
necessarily occur in any specific order with respect to each other, which is why they are labeled
with letters instead of numbers. Their invocation is determined by enterprise policy. For
example, enterprise policy determines how frequently the resource is reauthenticated, what
resource-related information the PDP needs to evaluate each access request and when it needs
it, and what resource-related changes (environmental, security analytics, etc.) would cause the
PDP to decide to revoke or limit access to a particular resource.
 Session Initiation Steps—I(): Session initiation steps are a sequence of actions that culminate in
the establishment of the initial session between a subject and the resource to which it has
requested access. These steps are labeled I(1) through I(5), and they occur in sequential order.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 8

 Session Management Steps—S(): Session management steps describe the actions that enable
the PDP to continually evaluate the session once it has been established. These steps begin to
be performed after the session has been established, i.e., after Step I(5), and they continue to
be invoked periodically for as long as the session remains active. These steps are labeled S(A)
through S(D) so that they can be distinguished from each other. However, the letters A through
D in the labels are not meant to imply an ordering. The session management steps do not
necessarily occur in any specific order with respect to each other. Their invocation is determined
by the access requests that are made by the subject in combination with enterprise policy. For
example, enterprise policy determines how frequently the subject is reauthenticated, what
information the PDP needs to evaluate each access request and when it needs it, and what
changes (environmental, security analytics, etc.) would cause the PDP to decide to deny a
particular access request or terminate an established session altogether.
Details describing each of the steps in these three processes can be found in our supplemental
documentation for ZTA In Operation.
3.2 EIG Crawl Phase Reference Architecture
To support the builds in the EIG crawl phase (the phase without enterprise cloud-based resources), a
constrained version of the general ZTA reference architecture depicted in Figure 3-1, called the EIG
Crawl Phase Reference Architecture, was used. The EIG Crawl Phase Reference Architecture is depicted
in Figure 3-2. This architecture included only ICAM, endpoint security, and security analytics
components and focused only on protecting resources located on premises. It relied on its ICAM
components to provide its PDP functionality, and the only security analytics functionality that it includes
is a SIEM. These limitations were intentionally placed on the architecture with the goal of demonstrating
the ZTA functionality that an enterprise with legacy ICAM and endpoint protection solutions deployed
on premises will be able to support without having to add ZTA-specific capabilities.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 9

Figure 3-2 EIG Crawl Phase Reference Architecture
3.3 EIG Run Phase Reference Architecture
The EIG run phase, as its name suggests, was built upon the EIG crawl phase architecture. To support the
builds in the EIG run phase, some constraints on the EIG crawl phase architecture were lifted. The PDP
functionality was no longer required to be provided by the ICAM products used in the build. In addition
to protecting access to resources that are located on-premises, the run phase architecture also protects
access to some resources that are hosted in the cloud. The EIG run phase also includes a device
discovery capability. In addition to monitoring and alerting when new devices are detected,
enforcement can be enabled to deny access to devices that are not compliant. The run phase also
includes the capability to establish a tunnel between the requesting endpoint and the resource being
accessed over which access to the resource can be brokered.
3.4 SDP, Microsegmentation, and SASE Reference Architecture
Unlike the EIG crawl and run phase builds, there are no constraints on the ZTA reference architecture
when it is used as the underlying design for a build using the SDP, microsegmentation, SASE deployment
approaches, or some combination of these. The SDP and microsegmentation deployment approaches
are described in NIST SP 800-207. The microsegmentation approach places one or more resources on
unique network segments protected by gateway security components and/or places software agents or
firewalls on endpoint assets to implement host-based microsegmentation. The SDP approach involves
reconfiguring the network based on access decisions. When implemented at the application layer, this
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 10

may be accomplished by establishing a secure channel between a software agent on the endpoint
requesting access to the resource and the resource gateway.
SASE delivers converged network and security as a service capability, including Software-Defined Wide
Area Network (SD-WAN), Secure Web Gateway (SWG), Cloud Access Security Broker (CASB), Next
Generation Firewall (NGFW) and Zero Trust Network Access (ZTNA). SASE supports branch office,
remote worker, and on-premises secure access use cases. SASE is primarily delivered as a service and
enables zero trust access based on the identity of the device or entity, combined with real-time context
and security and compliance policies.
The example solutions implemented as part of the SDP, microsegmentation, and SASE phase also
integrated additional supporting components and features to provide an increasingly rich set of ZTA
functionalities. The general ZTA reference architecture shown in Figure 3-1, without constraint, is used
to support all builds from the SDP, microsegmentation, and SASE phase of this project.
3.5 ZTA Laboratory Physical Architecture
The NCCoE provides virtual machine resources and physical infrastructure for the ZTA laboratory
environment. Figure 3-3 depicts the NCCoE ZTA lab. This environment includes four separate enterprise
environments, each capable of hosting its own distinct implementation of a ZTA architecture. The
enterprises may interoperate as needed by a given use case, and the baseline enterprise environments
have the flexibility to support enhancements. The laboratory environment also includes a management
virtual local area network (VLAN) on which the following components are installed: Ansible, Terraform,
Mandiant Security Validation (MSV) Director, and MSV Protected Theater. These management
components support infrastructure as code (IaC) automation and orchestration.
Figure 3-3 Physical Architecture of ZTA Lab
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 11

The NCCoE hosts all the collaborators’ ZTA-related software for Enterprises 1, 2, 3, and 4. It also
provides connectivity from the ZTA lab to the NIST Site, which provides connectivity to the internet and
public IP spaces (both IPv4 and IPv6).
Access to and from the ZTA lab is protected by a Palo Alto Networks Next Generation Firewall (PA-5250).
(The brick box icons in Figure 3-3 represent firewalls.) In addition to the four independent enterprises
(Enterprises 1, 2, 3, and 4) and the management and orchestration domain, the ZTA lab also includes a
branch office used only by Enterprise 1, a coffee shop that all enterprises can use, and an emulated wide
area network (WAN)/internet service provider. The emulated WAN service provider provides
connectivity among all the ZTA laboratory networks, i.e., among all the enterprises, the coffee shop, the
branch office, and the management and orchestration domain. Another Palo Alto Networks PA-5250
firewall that is split into separate virtual systems protects the network perimeters of each of the
enterprises and the branch office. The emulated WAN service provider also connects the ZTA laboratory
network to the NCCoE Site. The ZTA laboratory network has access to cloud services provided by AWS,
Azure, IBM Cloud, and Google Cloud, as well as connectivity to SaaS services provided by various
collaborators, all of which are available via the internet.
Each enterprise within the NCCoE laboratory environment is protected by a firewall and has both IPv4
and IPv6 (dual stack) configured. Each of the enterprises is equipped with a baseline architecture that is
intended to represent the typical environment of an enterprise before a zero trust deployment model is
instantiated.
The details of the baseline physical architecture of Enterprise 1, Enterprise 1 branch office, Enterprises 2,
3, and 4, the management and orchestration domain, the coffee shop, and all cloud services, as well as
the baseline software and security capabilities running on this physical architecture, are described in our
supplemental ZTA Laboratory Physical Architecture documentation.
3.6 Builds Implemented
The following is a list of the builds that have been implemented in the project, organized by build type.
Each of these builds instantiates the ZTA architecture in a unique way, depending on the equipment
used and the capabilities supported. The products used in each build were based on having out-of-box
integration. The details of each build architecture and implementation are shown in Table 4-1.
Note that after the VMware End User Computing Division products were implemented at NCCoE,
VMware was acquired by Broadcom, and then the VMware End User Computing Division was divested
and reformed under a new entity, Omnissa LLC.
Note that after Enterprise 3’s earlier Microsoft builds were completed, the name Azure AD was changed
to Entra ID, and the name Defender for Cloud Apps was changed to Defender for Apps.
Note that after Tenable products were implemented at NCCoE, the name Tenable.ad was changed to
Tenable Identity Exposure.
EIG Crawl Builds:
 Enterprise 1 Build 1 (E1B1) (EIG Crawl; Okta and Ivanti as PEs) uses products from AWS, IBM,
Ivanti, Mandiant, Okta, Radiant Logic, SailPoint, Tenable, and Zimperium. Certificates from
DigiCert are used.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 12

E1B1 components consist of DigiCert CertCentral, IBM Cloud Pak for Security (CP4S), IBM
Security QRadar XDR, Ivanti Access Zero Sign-On (ZSO), Ivanti Neurons for Unified Endpoint
Management (UEM), Ivanti Sentry, Ivanti Tunnel, Mandiant MSV, Okta Identity Cloud, Okta
Verify App, Radiant Logic RadiantOne Intelligent Identity Data Platform, SailPoint IdentityIQ,
Tenable.ad, Tenable.io, and Zimperium Mobile Threat Defense (MTD).
 Enterprise 2 Build 1 (E2B1) (EIG Crawl; Ping Identity as PE) uses products from Cisco Systems,
IBM, Mandiant, Palo Alto Networks, Ping Identity, Radiant Logic, SailPoint, and Tenable.
Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E2B1 components consist of Cisco Duo, DigiCert CertCentral, IBM Security QRadar XDR,
Mandiant MSV, Palo Alto Networks Next Generation Firewall (NGFW), PingFederate, which is a
service in the Ping Identity Software as a Service (SaaS) offering of PingOne, Radiant Logic
RadiantOne Intelligent Identity Data Platform, SailPoint IdentityIQ, Tenable.ad, Tenable.io, and
Tenable Nessus Network Monitor (NNM).
 Enterprise 3 Build 1 (E3B1) (EIG Crawl; Microsoft as PE) uses products from F5, Forescout,
Lookout, Mandiant, Microsoft, Palo Alto Networks, PC Matic, and Tenable. Certificates from
DigiCert are also used.
E3B1 components consist of DigiCert CertCentral, F5 BIG-IP, Forescout eyeSight, Lookout Mobile
Endpoint Security (MES), Mandiant MSV, Microsoft Active Directory (AD), Microsoft Azure AD,
Microsoft Defender for Endpoint, Microsoft Endpoint Manager, Microsoft Sentinel, Palo Alto
Networks NGFW, PC Matic Pro, Tenable.ad, and Tenable.io.
EIG Run Builds:
 Enterprise 1 Build 2 (E1B2) (EIG Run; Zscaler as PE) uses products from AWS, IBM, Ivanti,
Mandiant, Okta, Radiant Logic, SailPoint, Tenable, and Zscaler. Certificates from DigiCert are also
used.
E1B2 components consist of AWS Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), DigiCert CertCentral, IBM
CP4S, IBM Security QRadar XDR, Mandiant MSV, Okta Identity Cloud, Okta Verify App, Radiant
Logic RadiantOne Intelligent Identity Data Platform, SailPoint IdentityIQ, Tenable.ad, Tenable.io,
Tenable NNM, Zscaler Admin Portal, Zscaler Application Connector, Zscaler Central Authority,
Zscaler Client Connector (ZCC), Zscaler Internet Access (ZIA) Public Service Edges, and Zscaler
Private Access (ZPA) Public Service Edges.
 Enterprise 3 Build 2 (E3B2) (EIG Run; Microsoft and Forescout as PEs) uses products from F5,
Forescout, Mandiant, Microsoft, Palo Alto Networks, PC Matic, and Tenable. Certificates from
DigiCert are also used.
E3B2 components consist of DigiCert CertCentral, F5 BIG-IP, Forescout eyeControl, Forescout
eyeExtend, Forescout eyeSegment, Forescout eyeSight, Mandiant MSV, Microsoft AD, Microsoft
Azure AD, Microsoft Azure AD (Conditional Access), Microsoft Azure AD Identity Protection,
Microsoft Azure (IaaS), Microsoft Defender for Cloud, Microsoft Defender for Cloud Apps,
Microsoft Defender for Endpoint, Microsoft Intune, Microsoft Office 365 (SaaS), Microsoft
Sentinel, Palo Alto Networks NGFW, PC Matic Pro, Tenable.ad, Tenable.io, and Tenable NNM.
 Enterprise 4 Build 3 (E4B3) (EIG Run; IBM as PE) uses products from Broadcom (with VMware
products), IBM, Mandiant, Palo Alto Networks, and Tenable. Certificates from DigiCert are also
used.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 13

E4B3 components consist of DigiCert ONE, IBM CP4S, IBM QRadar XDR, IBM Security Guardium
Data Encryption, IBM Security MaaS360 (for both laptops and mobile devices), IBM Security
Verify, Mandiant MSV, Palo Alto Networks GlobalProtect Virtual Private Network (VPN),
Tenable.ad, Tenable.io, Tenable NNM, and VMware infrastructure.
SDP, Microsegmentation, and SASE Builds:
 Enterprise 1 Build 3 (E1B3) (SDP; Zscaler as PE) uses products from AWS, IBM, Ivanti, Mandiant,
Okta, Radiant Logic, SailPoint, Tenable, and Zscaler. Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E1B3 components consist of AWS Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), DigiCert CertCentral, IBM
CP4S, IBM Security QRadar XDR, Mandiant MSV, Okta Identity Cloud, Okta Verify App, Radiant
Logic RadiantOne Intelligent Identity Data Platform, SailPoint IdentityIQ, Tenable.ad, Tenable.io,
Tenable NNM, Zscaler Admin Portal, Zscaler Application Connector, Zscaler Central Authority,
Zscaler Client Connector (ZCC), Zscaler Internet Access (ZIA) Public Service Edges, and Zscaler
Private Access (ZPA) Public Service Edges.
 Enterprise 2 Build 3 (E2B3) (Microsegmentation; Cisco and Ping Identity as PEs) uses products
from Broadcom (with VMware products), Cisco Systems, IBM, Mandiant, Palo Alto Networks,
Ping Identity, Radiant Logic, SailPoint, and Tenable. Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E2B3 components consist of Cisco Duo, Cisco Identity Services Engine (ISE), Cisco network
devices, Cisco Secure Endpoint (CSE), Cisco Secure Network Analytics (SNA), Cisco Secure
Workload, DigiCert CertCentral, IBM Security QRadar XDR, Mandiant MSV, Palo Alto Networks
NGFW, Ping Identity PingOne, Radiant Logic RadiantOne Intelligent Identity Data Platform,
SailPoint IdentityIQ, Tenable.ad, Tenable.io, Tenable NNM, VMware Workspace ONE UEM and
Access.
 Enterprise 3 Build 3 (E3B3) (SDP and Microsegmentation; Microsoft and Forescout as PEs) uses
products from F5, Forescout, Mandiant, Microsoft, Palo Alto Networks, PC Matic, and Tenable.
Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E3B3 components consist of DigiCert CertCentral, F5 BIG-IP, Forescout eyeControl, Forescout
eyeExtend, Forescout eyeSight, Forescout eyeSegment, Mandiant MSV, Microsoft AD, Microsoft
Azure AD, Microsoft Azure AD (Conditional Access), Microsoft Azure AD Identity Governance,
Microsoft Intune, Microsoft Sentinel, Microsoft Azure App Proxy, Microsoft Defender for
Endpoint, Microsoft Azure AD Identity Protection, Microsoft Defender for Identity, Microsoft
Defender for Office, Microsoft Entra Permissions Management, Microsoft Defender for Cloud
Apps, Microsoft Purview – Data Loss Prevention (DLP), Microsoft Purview Information
Protection, Microsoft Purview Information Protection Scanner, Microsoft Intune VPN Tunnel,
Microsoft Azure Arc, Microsoft Azure Automanage, Microsoft Intune Privilege Access
Workstation, Microsoft Azure Virtual Desktop Windows 365, Microsoft Defender for Cloud,
Microsoft Azure (IaaS), Microsoft Office 365 (SaaS), Palo Alto Networks NGFW, PC Matic Pro,
Tenable.io, Tenable.ad, and Tenable NNM.
 Enterprise 1 Build 4 (E1B4) (SDP; Appgate as PE) uses products from AWS, Appgate, IBM, Ivanti,
Mandiant, Okta, Radiant Logic, SailPoint, Tenable, and Zimperium. Certificates from DigiCert are
also used.
E1B4 components consist of Appgate SDP Controller, Appgate SDP Gateway, Appgate SDP client,
Appgate Portal, AWS IaaS and SaaS, DigiCert CertCentral, IBM CP4S, IBM Security QRadar XDR,
Ivanti Neurons for UEM Platform, Mandiant MSV, Okta Identity Cloud, Okta Verify App, Radiant
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 14

Logic RadiantOne Intelligent Identity Data Platform, SailPoint IdentityIQ, Tenable.ad, Tenable.io,
Tenable NNM, and Zimperium MTD.
 Enterprise 2 Build 4 (E2B4) (SDP and SASE; Broadcom (with Symantec products) as PE) uses
products from Broadcom (with VMware and Symantec products), Google Cloud, IBM, Mandiant,
Okta, Radiant Logic, SailPoint, and Tenable. Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E2B4 components consist of Symantec Cloud Secure Web Gateway (Cloud SWG), Symantec Zero
Trust Network Access (ZTNA), Symantec Cloud Access Security Broker (CASB), Symantec
Endpoint Security Agent, VMware Workspace ONE UEM, Symantec DLP Cloud Detection Service,
Symantec ZTNA Connector, Okta Identity Cloud, Okta Verify App, Radiant Logic RadiantOne
Intelligent Identity Data Platform, SailPoint IdentityIQ, IBM Security QRadar XDR, Tenable.io,
Tenable.ad, Tenable NNM, Mandiant MSV, Google Cloud, and DigiCert CertCentral.
 Enterprise 3 Build 4 (E3B4) (SDP; F5 as PE) uses products from F5, Forescout, Mandiant,
Microsoft, Palo Alto Networks, and Tenable. Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E3B4 components consist of F5 BIG-IP, F5 NGINX Plus, F5 Access App, Microsoft AD, Microsoft
Azure AD, Microsoft Azure AD Identity Governance, Microsoft Intune, Microsoft Sentinel,
Tenable.io, Tenable.ad, Tenable NNM, Mandiant MSV, Forescout eyeControl, Forescout
eyeExtend, Forescout eyeSight, Forescout eyeSegment, Microsoft Azure (IaaS), and DigiCert
CertCentral.
 Enterprise 4 Build 4 (E4B4) (SDP; Microsegmentation, and EIG; Broadcom (with VMware
products) as PE) uses products from Broadcom (with VMware products), IBM, Mandiant, and
Tenable. Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E4B4 components consist of VMware Workspace ONE Access, VMware Unified Access Gateway
(UAG), VMware NSX-T, VMware Workspace ONE UEM, VMware Workspace ONE MTD, VMware
Carbon Black Enterprise EDR, VMware Carbon Black Cloud, VMware vSphere, VMware vCenter,
VMware vSAN, IBM Security QRadar XDR, Mandiant MSV, Tenable.io, Tenable.ad, Tenable NNM,
and DigiCert ONE.
 Enterprise 1 Build 5 (E1B5) (Microsegmentation and SASE; Palo Alto Networks as PE) uses
products from AWS, IBM, Mandiant, Okta, Palo Alto Networks, Radiant Logic, SailPoint, and
Tenable. Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E1B5 components consist of Palo Alto Networks (PAN) Panorama, PAN Next Generation Firewall
(NGFW), PAN Prisma Access, PAN Prisma SASE (Prisma Access & Prisma SD-WAN), PAN Cloud
Delivered Security Services (CDSS), PAN Cloud Identity Engine, PAN Global Protect, PAN Strata
Cloud Manager, Okta Identity Cloud, Radiant Logic RadiantOne Intelligent Identity Data
Platform, SailPoint IdentityIQ, Okta Verify App, IBM Security QRadar XDR, Tenable.io,
Tenable.ad, Tenable NNM, Mandiant MSV, DigiCert CertCentral, and AWS IaaS.
 Enterprise 2 Build 5 (E2B5) (SDP and SASE; Lookout SSE and Okta Identity Cloud as PEs) uses
products from Broadcom (with VMware products), Google Cloud, IBM, Lookout, Mandiant,
Okta, Radiant Logic, SailPoint, and Tenable. Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E2B5 components consist of Lookout Security Service Edge (SSE) (includes Secure Private Access
[SPA], Secure Cloud Access [SCA], and Secure Internet Access [SIA]), Lookout Secure Private
Access Connector, VMware Workspace ONE UEM, Lookout MES, Lookout Client, Okta Identity
Cloud, Okta Verify App, Radiant Logic RadiantOne Intelligent Identity Data Platform, SailPoint
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 15

IdentityIQ, IBM Security QRadar XDR, Tenable.io, Tenable.ad, Tenable NMM, Mandiant MSV,
Google Cloud, Google Workspace, and DigiCert CertCentral.
 Enterprise 3 Build 5 (E3B5) (SDP and SASE; Microsoft Entra Conditional Access (formerly called
Azure AD Conditional Access), and Microsoft Security Service Edge as PEs) uses products from
Mandiant, Microsoft, and Tenable. Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E3B5 components consist of Microsoft Entra Conditional Access, Microsoft Security Service Edge
(SSE) (which includes Entra Private Access, Entra Internet Access, and Microsoft 365 Access),
Microsoft Entra Private Access Connector, Microsoft Entra ID, Microsoft Entra ID Governance,
Microsoft Intune, Microsoft Defender for Endpoint, Microsoft Global Secure Access Client,
Microsoft Purview DLP, Microsoft Purview Information Protection, Microsoft Purview
Information Protection Scanner, Microsoft Entra ID Identity Protection, Microsoft Defender for
Identity, Microsoft Defender for Cloud, Microsoft Sentinel, Tenable.io, Tenable.ad, Mandiant
Security Validation, Microsoft Azure (IaaS), Microsoft 365 (SaaS), and DigiCert CertCentral.
 Enterprise 4 Build 5 (E4B5) (SDP and Microsegmentation; AWS Verified Access and Amazon VPC
Lattice as PEs) uses products from AWS, IBM, Mandiant, Okta, and Tenable. Certificates from
DigiCert are also used.
E4B5 components consist of AWS Verified Access, Amazon VPC Lattice, Amazon ECS and AWS
Lambda Functions, Okta Identity Cloud, Okta Verify App, IBM Security QRadar XDR, Tenable
Cloud Security, Mandiant MSV, DigiCert CertCentral, and AWS IaaS.
 Enterprise 1 Build 6 (E1B6) (SDP and Microsegmentation; Ivanti Neurons for Zero Trust Access
(nZTA) as PE) uses products from AWS, IBM, Ivanti, Mandiant, Okta, Radiant Logic, SailPoint, and
Tenable. Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E1B6 components consist of Ivanti nZTA, Ivanti nZTA Gateway, Okta Identity Cloud, Radiant
Logic RadiantOne Intelligent Identity Data Platform, SailPoint IdentityIQ, Okta Verify App, Ivanti
Secure Access Client, IBM Security QRadar XDR, Tenable.io, Tenable.ad, Tenable NNM,
Mandiant MSV, DigiCert CertCentral, and AWS IaaS.
 Enterprise 2 Build 6 (E2B6) (SASE; Google Chrome Enterprise Premium (CEP) – Access Context
Manager as PE) uses products from Google Cloud, IBM, Mandiant, Okta, Radiant Logic, SailPoint,
Tenable, and Omnissa. Certificates from DigiCert are also used.
E2B6 components consist of Google CEP, Google Application Connector, Omnissa Workspace
ONE UEM, Okta Identity Cloud, Okta Verify App, Radiant Logic RadiantOne Intelligent Identity
Data Platform, SailPoint IdentityIQ, IBM Security QRadar XDR, Tenable.io, Tenable.ad, Tenable
NNM, Mandiant MSV, Google Cloud (IaaS), Google Workspace (SaaS), and DigiCert CertCentral.
4 Build Implementation Instructions
Table 4-1 identifies the policy engines/policy decision points and types of architecture used in each
build. It also links to the online locations where each build architecture is described in detail, as well as
the online locations where instructions for implementing each build can be found. These build
implementation instructions are designed to enable information technology professionals to replicate all
or parts of this project.
To see which build suits your organization, you can first identify which of the ZTA approaches—EIG, SDP,
microsegmentation, or SASE—meets your organization’s requirements. You can then look at the build
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 16

options provided in Table 4-1. Based on your selection of the ZTA approach, you can view the details of
the relevant builds by clicking the link in the “Build Architecture, Technologies, and Flow Diagrams”
column.
Since most enterprises evolve their enterprise architecture toward ZTA, i.e., by starting with their
already-existing enterprise environment and gradually adding or adapting capabilities such as PE, you
can start by looking at the builds with the products closest to your existing environment.
Table 4-1 Mapping of Builds to Online Details Regarding Architecture Descriptions and Implementation
Instructions
Build  Policy Engines/ Policy  ZTA Architecture  Links to Online  Links to Online
Decision Points  Instantiated  Details: Build  Details: Build
|     |     | Architecture,      | Implementation  |
| --- | --- | ------------------ | --------------- |
|     |     | Technologies, and  | Instructions    |
Flow Diagrams
E1B1  Okta Identity Cloud  EIG Crawl  E1B1 Build  E1B1 Build
|     |     | Architecture  | Implementation  |
| --- | --- | ------------- | --------------- |
Ivanti Access ZSO
Instructions
| E2B1  Ping Identity Ping  | EIG Crawl  | E2B1 Build    | E2B1 Build      |
| ------------------------- | ---------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| Federate                  |            | Architecture  | Implementation  |
Instructions
E3B1  Azure AD (Conditional  EIG Crawl  E3B1 Build  E3B1 Build
| Access, later renamed  |     | Architecture  | Implementation  |
| ---------------------- | --- | ------------- | --------------- |
| Entra Conditional      |     |               | Instructions    |
Access)
| E1B2  Zscaler ZPA Central  | EIG Run  | E1B2 Build    | E1B2 Build      |
| -------------------------- | -------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| Authority (CA)             |          | Architecture  | Implementation  |
Instructions
| E3B2  Microsoft Azure AD  | EIG Run  | E3B2 Build    | E3B2 Build      |
| ------------------------- | -------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| (Conditional Access,      |          | Architecture  | Implementation  |
| later renamed Entra       |          |               | Instructions    |
Conditional Access)
Microsoft Intune
Forescout eyeControl
Forescout eyeExtend
| E4B3  IBM Security Verify  | EIG Run  | E4B3 Build    | E4B3 Build      |
| -------------------------- | -------- | ------------- | --------------- |
|                            |          | Architecture  | Implementation  |
Instructions
| E1B3  Zscaler ZPA Central  | SDP   | E1B3 Build    | E1B3 Build      |
| -------------------------- | ----- | ------------- | --------------- |
| Authority (CA)             |       | Architecture  | Implementation  |
Instructions
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture  17

Build  Policy Engines/ Policy  ZTA Architecture  Links to Online  Links to Online
Decision Points  Instantiated  Details: Build  Details: Build
|     |     | Architecture,      | Implementation  |
| --- | --- | ------------------ | --------------- |
|     |     | Technologies, and  | Instructions    |
Flow Diagrams
E2B3  Ping Identity  Microsegmentation  E2B3 Build  E2B3 Build
| PingFederate  |     | Architecture  | Implementation  |
| ------------- | --- | ------------- | --------------- |
| Cisco ISE     |     |               | Instructions    |
Cisco Secure Workload
| E3B3  Microsoft Azure AD  | SDP and  | E3B3 Build  | E3B3 Build  |
| ------------------------- | -------- | ----------- | ----------- |
(Conditional Access,  Microsegmentation  Architecture  Implementation
| later renamed Entra  |     |     | Instructions  |
| -------------------- | --- | --- | ------------- |
Conditional Access)
Microsoft Intune
Microsoft Sentinel
Forescout eyeControl
Forescout eyeExtend
| E1B4  Appgate SDP Controller  | SDP  | E1B4 Build    | E1B4 Build      |
| ----------------------------- | ---- | ------------- | --------------- |
|                               |      | Architecture  | Implementation  |
Instructions
E2B4  Symantec Cloud Secure  SDP and SASE  E2B4 Build  E2B4 Build
| Web Gateway (Cloud  |     | Architecture  | Implementation  |
| ------------------- | --- | ------------- | --------------- |
| SWG)                |     |               | Instructions    |
Symantec ZTNA
Symantec Cloud Access
Security Broker (CASB)
| E3B4  F5 BIG-IP  | SDP  | E3B4 Build    | E3B4 Build      |
| ---------------- | ---- | ------------- | --------------- |
|                  |      | Architecture  | Implementation  |
F5 NGINX Plus
Instructions
Forescout eyeControl
Forescout eyeExtend
| E4B4  VMware Workspace  | SDP,  | E4B4 Build  | E4B4 Build  |
| ----------------------- | ----- | ----------- | ----------- |
ONE Access  Microsegmentation,  Architecture  Implementation
| VMware Unified Access  | and EIG  |     | Instructions  |
| ---------------------- | -------- | --- | ------------- |
Gateway (UAG)
VMware NSX-T
| E1B5  PAN NGFW  | SASE and           | E1B5 Build    | E1B5 Build      |
| --------------- | ------------------ | ------------- | --------------- |
|                 | Microsegmentation  | Architecture  | Implementation  |
PAN Prisma Access
Instructions
| E2B5  Lookout SSE  | SDP and SASE  | E2B5 Build    | E2B5 Build      |
| ------------------ | ------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
|                    |               | Architecture  | Implementation  |
Okta Identity Clouds
Instructions
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture  18

Build  Policy Engines/ Policy  ZTA Architecture  Links to Online  Links to Online
Decision Points  Instantiated  Details: Build  Details: Build
|     |     | Architecture,      | Implementation  |
| --- | --- | ------------------ | --------------- |
|     |     | Technologies, and  | Instructions    |
Flow Diagrams
| E3B5  Microsoft Entra   | SDP and SASE  | E3B5 Build    | E3B5 Build      |
| ----------------------- | ------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| Conditional Access      |               | Architecture  | Implementation  |
| (formerly called Azure  |               |               | Instructions    |
AD Conditional Access)
Microsoft Security
Service Edge
| E4B5  AWS Verified Access  | SDP and  | E4B5 Build  | E4B5 Build  |
| -------------------------- | -------- | ----------- | ----------- |
and Amazon VPC  Microsegmentation  Architecture  Implementation
| Lattice  |     |     | Instructions  |
| -------- | --- | --- | ------------- |
E1B6  Ivanti Neurons for Zero  SDP and  E1B6 Build  E1B6 Build
Trust Access  Microsegmentation  Architecture  Implementation
Instructions
| E2B6  Google CEP – Access  | SASE  | E2B6 Build    | E2B6 Build      |
| -------------------------- | ----- | ------------- | --------------- |
| Context Manager            |       | Architecture  | Implementation  |
Instructions
5  General Findings
When deploying ZTA, the following capabilities are considered to be fundamental to determining
whether a request to access a resource should be granted and, once granted, whether the access
session should be permitted to persist:
  Authentication and periodic reauthentication of the requesting user’s identity
  Authentication and periodic reauthentication of the requesting endpoint
  Authentication and periodic reauthentication of the endpoint that is hosting the resource being
accessed

Each authentication and reauthentication includes authorization and reauthorization
In addition, the following capabilities are also considered highly desirable:
  Verification and periodic reverification of the requesting endpoint’s health
  Verification and periodic reverification of the health of the endpoint that is hosting the resource
being accessed
5.1  EIG Crawl Phase Findings
In the EIG crawl phase, we followed two patterns. First, we leveraged our ICAM solutions to also act as
PDPs. We discovered that many of the vendor solutions used in the EIG crawl phase do not integrate
with each other out-of-the-box in ways that are needed to enable the ICAM solutions to function as
PDPs. Typically, network-level PEPs, such as routers, switches, and firewalls, do not integrate directly
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture  19

with ICAM solutions. However, network-level PEPs that are identity-aware may integrate with ICAM
solutions. Also, endpoint protection solutions in general do not typically integrate directly with ICAM
solutions. However, some of the endpoint protection solutions considered for use in the builds have
out-of-the-box integrations with the mobile device management (MDM)/UEM solutions used, which
provide the endpoint protection solutions with an indirect integration with the ICAM solutions.
Second, we used out-of-the-box integrations offered by the solution providers rather than performing
custom integrations. These two patterns combined do not support all the desired zero trust capabilities.
Both builds E1B1 and E3B1 were capable of authenticating and reauthenticating requesting users and
requesting endpoints and of verifying and periodically reverifying the health of requesting endpoints,
and both builds were able to base their access decisions on the results of these actions. Access requests
were not granted unless the identities of the requesting user and the requesting endpoint could be
authenticated and the health of the requesting endpoint could be validated; however, no check was
performed to authenticate the identity or verify the health of the endpoint hosting the resource.
Access sessions that are in progress in both builds are periodically reevaluated by reauthenticating the
identities of the requesting user and the requesting endpoint and by verifying the health of the
requesting endpoint. If these periodic reauthentications and verifications cannot be performed
successfully, the access session will eventually be terminated; however, neither the identity nor the
health of the endpoint hosting the resource is verified on an ongoing basis, nor does its identity or
health determine whether it is permitted to be accessed.
Neither build E1B1 nor build E3B1 was able to support resource management as envisioned in the ZTA
logical architecture depicted in Figure 3-1. These builds do not include any ZTA technologies that
perform authentication and reauthentication of resources that host endpoints, nor are these builds
capable of verifying or periodically reverifying the health of the endpoints that host resources. In
addition, when using both builds E1B1 and E3B1, devices (requesting endpoints and endpoints hosting
resources) were initially joined to the network manually. Neither of the two EIG crawl phase builds
includes any technologies that provide network-level enforcement of an endpoint’s ability to access the
network. That is, there is no tool in either build that can keep any endpoint (either one that is hosting a
resource or one that is used by a user) from initially joining the network based on its authentication
status. The goal is to try to support resource management in future builds as allowed by the
technologies used.
5.2 EIG Run Phase Findings
The EIG run phase enabled us to demonstrate additional capabilities over the EIG crawl phase, such as:
 establishment of secure, direct access tunnels from requesting endpoints to private enterprise
resources, regardless of whether the resources are located on-premises or in the cloud, driven
by policy and enforced by PEPs
 use of connectors that act as proxies for internal, private enterprise resources, enabling
resources to be accessed by authenticated, authorized users while ensuring that they are not
discoverable by or visible to others
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 20

 protection for private enterprise resources hosted in the cloud that enables authenticated,
authorized remote users to access those resources directly rather than having to hairpin
through the enterprise network
 ability to monitor, inspect, and enforce policy controls on traffic being sent to and from
resources in the cloud or on the internet
 discovery of new endpoints on the network and the ability to block newly discovered endpoints
that are not compliant with policy
Build E1B2, which uses Zscaler as its PE, PA, and PEP, does not have an EPP because this build does not
include any collaborators with EPP solutions that integrate with Zscaler. Zscaler (e.g., the Zscaler client
connector) has the capability to enforce policies based on a defined set of endpoint compliance checks
to allow or deny user/endpoint access to a resource. However, it does not perform the functions of an
EPP solution to protect an endpoint. Zscaler integrates with EPP solutions to receive a more robust set
of information about the endpoints in order to make a decision to allow or deny access to a resource.
However, in build E1B2, we do not have a collaborator with an EPP solution that can integrate with
Zscaler.
Because there is no EPP in E1B2, there is no automatic solution to remediate an issue on the endpoint
either.
Build E1B2 also does not have a collaborator with a solution that supports the determination of
confidence level/trust scores that can integrate with Zscaler. Due to the absence of a collaborator with
this capability, Build E1B2 does not support the calculation of confidence levels/trust scores.
Build E2B1, which uses Ping Identity as its PE and PA and Ping Identity and Cisco Duo as its PEP, does not
have an EPP. Cisco Duo provides limited device health information but not the full spectrum that an EPP
would provide. Because there is no official EPP in this build, there is no automatic solution to remediate
an issue on the endpoint. An EPP for Enterprise 2 was included in a later build phase (E2B3).
When planning a ZTA implementation, organizations should ensure that all of the ZTA core and
supporting components that can integrate with each other are selected. This enables having end-to-end
ZTA with full functionality.
Build E3B2 currently supports one-way integration between Microsoft Intune and Forescout eyeExtend.
If Intune detects an endpoint out of compliance, eyeExtend can become informed of this problem by
pulling information from Intune. However, if one of Forescout’s discovery tools detects a problem with
an endpoint, there is currently no mechanism for this information to be passed from Forescout
eyeExtend to Microsoft Intune. Ideally, future integration of these products would allow Forescout
eyeExtend to inform Microsoft Intune when it detects a non-Azure AD-connected endpoint that is non-
compliant, as this would enable Intune to direct Azure AD to block sign-in from the non-compliant
endpoint. Without a mechanism for enabling Forescout eyeExtend to send endpoint compliance
information to Microsoft Intune, Azure AD does not have a way of knowing that a non-Azure AD-
connected endpoint is not compliant.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 21

5.3 SDP, Microsegmentation, and SASE Phase Findings
More integration of zero trust products from different vendors is needed to support the implementation
of ZTAs that are built using components from a variety of vendors. For the most effective zero trust
solutions, PDPs should integrate with a variety of security tools and other supporting components that
enable the PDP to assess the real-time risk of any given access request.
It is not unusual for a ZTA to have multiple PDPs, each of which may be integrated with one or more
different supporting components and/or PEPs. As a result, the policies that the ZTA enforces are not
centrally located. Rather, they are configured and managed in association with each of the various PDPs.
This makes it challenging to understand, articulate, and manage the ZTA’s policies as a comprehensive
whole.
In addition, the multiple PDPs that comprise a ZTA do not typically integrate with each other to share
information, so they do not have a shared understanding of what users, endpoints, or other subjects
may pose risks. For example, one PDP may be aware that an endpoint is non-compliant, whereas this
same endpoint compliance information is not available to another PDP. On the other hand, the second
PDP may be aware that the endpoint’s user may have exhibited suspicious behavior, whereas the first
PDP is not. Ideally, when a ZTA has multiple PDPs, it is desirable to have an integrated approach that
enables the PDPs to share information so that they can each be more fully informed, share a common,
consolidated understanding of risks, and make a decision based on all information available.
The SIEM and/or security orchestration, automation, and response (SOAR) components contain a wealth
of information that could prove useful to a PDP as it tries to determine whether any given access
request should be allowed or not. Ideally, the SIEM and SOAR should send this information to the PDP in
real-time, if possible, to ensure that the PDP’s access decisions are fully informed.
Ideally, data security tools should be integrated with the PDP so that the PDP can be made aware of
instances in which access requests are denied by the tools that are designed to protect data.
Additionally, risk information and user behavior analytics should be shared with the PDP to potentially
improve ZTA security.
Some zero trust SDP solutions for managing endpoints can also manage resources by installing clients
onto those resources. However, solutions that are specifically designed to manage resources should be
leveraged rather than the zero trust solutions that have the primary purpose of managing endpoints. In
some cases, the solutions that manage resources do not have out-of-the-box integration with the PDPs.
PDP integration capability should be available in these resource management solutions.
Endpoint compliance is essential for security. It is important to have tools that are capable of detecting
when an endpoint is not compliant and ensuring that the endpoint is not permitted to access resources
as a result. Furthermore, automatic solutions to remediate noncompliance issues on the endpoint
should be deployed when possible, and these should be integrated with the organization’s configuration
and patch management systems.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 22

6 Functional Demonstrations
This section defines the methodologies we used to demonstrate the capabilities of the project’s ZTA
builds, summarizes the use cases that were demonstrated, and summarizes the results of performing
these use cases with each of the project’s builds.
6.1 Demonstration Methodology
We are leveraging two types of demonstration methodologies in this project: manual and automated.
Demonstrations that require human interaction (e.g., a user performs MFA) must be performed
manually. Demonstrations that do not require human interaction can be performed either manually,
automated, or both. It is also possible to perform demonstrations in a hybrid manner in which the early
part of a demonstration that requires user authentication is performed manually, followed by an
automated portion of the demonstration. This approach can be helpful for demonstrations that are
complicated yet nevertheless require human interaction.
We deployed Mandiant MSV throughout the project’s laboratory environment to enable us to monitor
and verify various security characteristics of the builds. MSV automates a testing program that provides
visibility and evidence of how security controls are performing by emulating attackers to safely process
advanced cyberattack security content within production environments. It is designed so defenses
respond to it as if an attack is taking place within the enterprise. Virtual machines (VMs) that are
intended to operate as actors are deployed on each of the subnetworks in each of the enterprises.
These actors can be used to initiate various actions for the purpose of verifying that security controls are
working to support the objectives of zero trust. We also deployed three VMs that operate as directors,
two of which function as applications within Enterprise 1 and Enterprise 3 that are used by those
enterprises to monitor and audit their own traffic, and one of which is an overarching director that is
located within the management and orchestration domain and used by the project team to
demonstrate and audit operations that span multiple enterprises.
This setup enabled the following dual-purpose MSV deployment:
1. A typical MSV deployment, in which each enterprise deploys MSV as an application within its
own enterprise, uses MSV for self-auditing and testing. Each enterprise deploys a director and
multiple actors that function as applications within the enterprise, enabling the enterprise to
monitor and test its own enterprise security capabilities, verifying the protections it receives
from the ZTA and its ability to operate as expected. In this capacity, MSV is treated just like any
other application deployed within that enterprise. The components may be protected by PEPs
according to enterprise policies, and directors and actors exchange traffic over the same data
communications paths as other enterprise applications. Firewalls and policies within the ZTA
must be configured to permit the communications that the MSV components send and receive,
including traffic that is sent between actors and the director to control the actions that are
performed to test various security controls.
2. The NCCoE project team, as testers, use MSV to monitor and audit enterprise and inter-
enterprise actions. The project team deploys an overarching director and a management
backchannel connecting that director to all actors throughout the laboratory environment. This
overarching director is used as a tool to verify the security controls provided by each of the ZTAs
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 23

in the various enterprises and to monitor and audit inter-enterprise interactions. In this
capacity, MSV does not function as an application deployed or controlled by enterprises; rather,
it is a tool used to monitor and audit enterprise and inter-enterprise activity. Communications
between the actors and this overarching director occur on a management channel that is
separate from the data networks in each of the enterprises. Using a separate backchannel
ensures that the tool being used to monitor and verify the various ZTA architectures does not
itself impact those architectures. Enabling the overarching MSV director to control the actor
VMs via a backchannel requires each of the actor VMs to have two network interface cards
(NICs), one for enterprise data and one for MSV tool interoperation. The use of a separate
backchannel ensures that enterprise ZTA policies and firewalls don’t need to be modified to
accommodate the overarching MSV testing by permitting traffic between the overarching
director and the actors that would not normally be expected to transit any of the enterprise
networks. Such policy and firewall modification would have been undesirable and would, in
effect, have amounted to unauthorized channels into the enterprise networks.
An MSV protective theater was also created in the lab. This is a virtualized system that allows
destructive actions to be tested without adversely impacting the enterprise deployments themselves.
For example, to understand the effects that malware might have on a specific system in one of the
enterprises, that system could be imported into the protective theater and infected with malware to
test what the destructive effects of the malware might be.
6.2 Demonstration Use Cases
Eight demonstration use cases were defined to exercise the security functionality provided by each of
the example solutions that were implemented as part of this project. Each use case consists of one or
more scenarios. The use cases and their scenarios are summarized in the following subsections.
More detailed descriptions of each use case and scenario, including their preconditions; demonstration
steps; purposes; detailed tables of the various permutations of subject, ID, endpoint, and resource
attributes to be exercised; and expected outcomes are available in our supplemental documentation on
Functional Demonstrations.
Definitions of terminology used throughout the demonstration scenarios are available in our
Demonstration Terminology documentation. The terminology includes identifier, subject, endpoint, and
resource types; compliance; authentication status; access levels; user and access profiles; assumptions;
and other information that is required to fully describe the demonstration use cases.
6.2.1 Use Case A: Discovery and Identification
Use Case A demonstrates discovery and identification of identifiers, endpoint assets, and data flows. Its
scenarios are:
 Scenario A-1: Discovery and authentication of endpoint assets
 Scenario A-2: Reauthentication of identified assets
 Scenario A-3: Discovery of transaction flows
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 24

6.2.2 Use Case B: Enterprise-ID Access
Use Case B demonstrates a subject with an ID that is issued and maintained by the enterprise requesting
access to a resource. Its scenarios are:
 Scenario B-1: Full/limited resource access using an enterprise endpoint – the subject is granted
full, limited, or no access to the requested resource as determined by its authentication status
and endpoint compliance status.
 Scenario B-2: Full/limited internet access using an enterprise endpoint – the subject is granted
full, limited, or no access to the requested internet domain as determined by enterprise policy.
 Scenario B-3: Stolen credential using an enterprise endpoint – a legitimate user’s enterprise ID
credential is stolen and is used to request access to an enterprise resource from an enterprise-
managed endpoint.
 Scenario B-4: Full/limited resource access using BYOD – a subject using a bring-your-own-device
(BYOD) is granted full or limited access to the requested resource as determined by
authentication status and enterprise policy.
 Scenario B-5: Full/limited internet access based on ID attributes – the subject is granted full,
limited, or no access to the requested internet domain as determined by enterprise ID profiles
and enterprise policy.
 Scenario B-6: Stolen credential using BYOD – a legitimate user’s enterprise ID credential is stolen
and is used to request access to an enterprise resource from a BYOD endpoint.
 Scenario B-7: Just-in-Time Access Privileges – An enterprise provisions access privileges to a
resource based on a single business process flow. Temporary privileges are granted to perform a
portion of the business process and then revoked when the process is complete.
 Scenario B-8: Enterprise-ID Step-Up Authentication – A subject who already has an active access
session with a resource, requests to perform an action on that resource that requires additional
authentication checks.
6.2.3 Use Case C: Collaboration: Federated-ID Access
Use Case C demonstrates a subject with a successfully authenticated Federated-ID (i.e., an ID that is
issued and maintained by another enterprise in a trusted community of interest) requesting access to a
resource. Its scenarios are:
 Scenario C-1: Full resource access using an enterprise endpoint – the subject is granted full
access to the requested resource as determined by its endpoint compliance status.
 Scenario C-2: Limited resource access using an enterprise endpoint – the subject is granted
limited access to the requested resource as determined by its endpoint compliance status.
 Scenario C-3: Limited internet access using an enterprise endpoint – the subject is granted
limited access to internet domains as determined by its endpoint compliance status and
enterprise policy.
 Scenario C-4: No internet access using enterprise owned endpoint – the subject is denied all
access to internet domains as determined by enterprise policy.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 25

 Scenario C-5: Internet access using BYOD – the subject is granted or denied access to an internet
domain as determined by enterprise policy.
 Scenario C-6: Access resources using BYOD – the subject is granted limited access to an
enterprise resource as determined by enterprise policy, which dictates that if a subject is using a
BYOD, the subject’s access to enterprise resources will be limited.
 Scenario C-7: Stolen credential using an enterprise endpoint – a legitimate user’s federated ID
credential is stolen and is used to request access to an enterprise resource from an enterprise-
managed endpoint.
 Scenario C-8: Stolen credential using BYOD – a legitimate user’s federated ID credential is stolen
and is used to request access to an enterprise resource from a BYOD endpoint.
6.2.4 Use Case D: Other-ID Access
Use Case D demonstrates a subject with an Other-ID (i.e., an ID that is issued and maintained by another
enterprise but known or registered by the first enterprise) requesting access to a resource. Its scenarios
are:
 Scenario D-1: Full/limited resource access using an enterprise endpoint – the subject is granted
full, limited, or no access to the requested resource as determined by its authentication status
and endpoint compliance status.
 Scenario D-2: Full/limited internet access using an enterprise endpoint – the subject is granted
full, limited, or no access to the requested internet domain as determined by enterprise policy.
 Scenario D-3: Stolen credential using BYOD or enterprise endpoint – a legitimate user’s Other-ID
credential is stolen and is used to request access to an enterprise resource from either an
enterprise-managed endpoint or a BYOD.
 Scenario D-4: Full/limited resource access using BYOD – a subject using a bring-your-own device
(BYOD) is granted full or limited access to the requested resource as determined by
authentication status and enterprise policy.
 Scenario D-5: Full/limited internet access using BYOD – the subject is granted or denied access
to an internet domain as determined by enterprise policy.
 Scenario D-6: Stolen credential using BYOD – a legitimate user’s Other-ID credential is stolen and
is used to request access to an enterprise resource from a BYOD endpoint.
 Scenario D-7: Just-in-Time Access Privileges – An enterprise provisions access privileges to a
resource based on a single business process flow. Temporary privileges are granted to perform a
portion of the business process and then revoked when the process is complete.
 Scenario D-8: Other-ID Step-Up Authentication – A subject who already has an active access
session with a resource requests to perform an action on that resource that requires additional
authentication checks.
6.2.5 Use Case E: Guest: No-ID Access
Use Case E demonstrates a subject that does not have an ID (i.e., a guest on the network) requesting
access to a resource. Its scenario is:
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 26

 Scenario E-1: Guest requests public internet access – the guest user is permitted to access public
internet domains and resources.
6.2.6 Use Case F: Confidence Level
Use Case F demonstrates a subject that has been granted access to a resource and has an active session
to the resource. The events listed in the following use cases cause the subject’s authorization to access
the resource to be re-evaluated:
 Scenario F-1: User reauthentication fails during active session, causing the subject’s access to
the resource to be terminated.
 Scenario F-2: Requesting endpoint reauthentication fails during active session, causing the
subject’s access to the resource to be terminated.
 Scenario F-3: Resource reauthentication fails during active session, causing the subject’s access
to the resource to be terminated.
 Scenario F-4: Compliance fails during active session, causing the subject’s access to the resource
to be terminated.
 Scenario F-5: Compliance improves between requests – in this case the subject had not been
permitted to access a resource due to non-compliance of the requesting endpoint. However,
after the endpoint is brought into compliance and access to the resource is requested again,
access is granted.
 Scenario F-6: Enterprise-ID Violating Data Use Policy, causing the subject’s access to the
resource to be terminated.
 Scenario F-7: Other-ID Violating Data Use Policy, causing the subject’s access to the resource to
be terminated.
 Scenario F-8: Enterprise-ID Violating Internet Use Policy.
 Scenario F-9: Other-ID Violating Internet Use Policy, causing the subject’s access to the resource
to be terminated.
 Scenario F-10: Enterprise-ID Attempting Unauthorized Access Detection and Response, Access
Queries – the enterprise detects a subject’s attempt to access an unauthorized resource and
responds by revoking access to a resource to which the subject had previously been granted
access.
 Scenario F-11: Enterprise-ID Attempting Unauthorized Access Detection and Response, Ongoing
Sessions - the enterprise detects a subject’s attempt to access an unauthorized resource and
responds by terminating the user’s active, open access session with a resource.
 Scenario F-12: Other-ID Attempting Unauthorized Access Detection and Response, Access
Queries - the enterprise detects a subject’s attempt to access an unauthorized resource and
responds by revoking access to a resource to which the subject had previously been granted
access.
 Scenario F-13: Other-ID Attempting Unauthorized Access Detection and Response, Ongoing
Sessions - the enterprise detects a subject’s attempt to access an unauthorized resource and
responds by terminating the user’s active, open access session with a resource.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 27

 Scenario F-14: Enterprise-ID Denied Access Due to Suspicious Endpoint – A subject requests
access from an endpoint that had been previously flagged as being suspected of being
compromised. The enterprise responds by denying the request and preventing all access
requests from the enterprise ID used in this request.
 Scenario F-15: Other-ID Denied Access due to Suspicious Endpoint – A subject requests access
from an endpoint that had been previously flagged as being suspected of being compromised.
The enterprise responds by denying the request and preventing all access requests from the
Other-ID used in this request.
 Scenario F-16: Enterprise-ID Access Terminated Due to Suspicious Endpoint – A subject requests
access from an endpoint that had been previously flagged as being suspected of being
compromised. The enterprise responds by denying the request and terminating any open access
sessions from the Enterprise-ID used in this request.
 Scenario F-17: Other-ID Access Terminated Due to Suspicious Endpoint – A subject requests
access from an endpoint that had been previously flagged as being suspected of being
compromised. The enterprise responds by denying the request and terminating any open access
sessions from the Other-ID used in this request.
6.2.7 Use Case G: Service-Service Interaction
Use Case G demonstrates service-to-service Interactions in which a non-person subject requests access
to a resource via API calls. The enterprise can uniquely identify and authenticate both the subject and
the resource, and both the subject and the resource are in compliance. Whether or not the access
request is granted depends on whether the subject is authorized to access the resource, which depends
on enterprise policy. The access request is an API call between two services; the location of the services
varies by scenario, as can be seen in the scenarios listed here:
 Scenario G-1: Service Calls Between Resources – both the subject and the resource are located
on enterprise-operated infrastructure (on-premises or branch).
 Scenario G-2: Service Calls to Cloud-Based Resources – the subject is located on enterprise-
operated infrastructure while the resource is cloud-based.
 Scenario G-3: Service Calls between Cloud-Based Resources – both the subject and the resource
are located in the cloud.
 Scenario G-4: Service Calls between Containers – the subject is either in another container in a
single container runtime (e.g., Docker), in the same Kubernetes pod, or in a different Kubernetes
pod from the requested resource.
 Scenario G-5: Service to Endpoint – an enterprise service attempts to access an enterprise-
managed endpoint to perform some action (e.g., maintenance, reconfiguration, etc.).
6.2.8 Use Case H: Data Level Security Scenarios
Use Case H demonstrates data level security scenarios in which a subject requests access to data with
different levels of classification. There are at least two different levels of data sensitivity, and a subject
who is authorized to access a resource will be authorized either to have full access to the highest level of
data or to have limited access to the data (e.g., low/limited/partial access) based on user identity,
endpoint type, and other attributes as articulated in the following use cases:
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 28

 Scenario H-1: Full/Limited Access to Resource Data Based on Identity Attributes – the subject
will be granted full or limited access to different levels of data based on their user identity
attributes.
 Scenario H-2: Full/Limited Access to Resource Data Based on Requesting Endpoint – the subject
will be granted full or limited access to different levels of data based on whether the requesting
endpoint is enterprise-managed or BYOD.
 Scenario H-3: Internet Access restricted when Accessing High Level Data – while a subject has an
active access session to a resource storing data with high classification, the enterprise will
restrict that subject from accessing public internet resources.
 Scenario H-4: Accessing High Level Data Triggers MFA Challenge – if a subject already as an
active access session with a resource and is accessing low-classification data, a request to access
high-classification data at that resource will trigger a multi-factor authentication challenge.
 Scenario H-5: Just-in-Time Access to High-Level Data – the enterprise can grant a subject
temporary access privileges to high-level data when needed.
 Scenario H-6: Operations Denied When Accessing High Level Data – a subject that is authorized
to fully access (e.g., read and write) high classification data when using an enterprise-managed
endpoint and located on premises or at a branch office can have their access privileges limited
to read-only when using a BYOD or when located remote from enterprise infrastructure.
 Scenario H-7: High Classified Data Has Extra Protection When Stored on Endpoints – when a
subject downloads or copies high classification data onto the subject’s endpoint, the data is
encrypted or has some further protection that requires the subject to pass a challenge before
accessing or performing actions on the local copy of the data.
6.3 Functional Demonstration Results
The summary and detailed functional demonstration results are shown in the sections below.
6.3.1 Demonstration Result Summaries
6.3.1.1 EIG Crawl Phase
Three builds were implemented and demonstrated as part of the EIG crawl phase:
 E1B1 (EIG Crawl; Okta and Ivanti as PEs)
 E2B1 (EIG Crawl; Ping Identity as PE)
 E3B1 (EIG Crawl; Microsoft as PE)
The following scenarios were considered out of scope for the EIG Crawl Phase:
 Cloud-based,
 Stolen Credential,
 Just-in-Time Access Privileges,
 Enterprise-ID Step-Up Authentication,
 Federated-ID Access,
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 29

 Confidence Level, and
 Service-Service Interactions.
Summaries of the demonstration results for each of these builds can be found in our supplemental EIG
Crawl Phase Summary Demonstration Results documentation.
6.3.1.2 EIG Run Phase
Three builds were implemented as part of the EIG run phase:
 E1B2 (EIG Run; Zscaler as PE)
 E3B2 (EIG Run; Microsoft and Forescout as PEs)
 E4B3 (EIG Run; IBM as PE)
The following scenarios were considered out of scope for the EIG Run Phase for builds E1B2 and E3B2:
 Just-in-Time Access Privileges,
 Enterprise-ID Step-Up Authentication,
 Federated-ID Access,
 Confidence Level, and
 Service-Service.
Summaries of the demonstration results for each of these builds can be found in our supplemental EIG
Run Phase Summary Demonstration Results documentation.
6.3.1.3 SDP, Microsegmentation, and SASE Phase
Thirteen builds were implemented as part of the SDP, Microsegmentation, and SASE phase:
 E1B3 (SDP; Zscaler as PE)
 E2B3 (Microsegmentation; Cisco and Ping Identity as PEs)
 E3B3 (SDP and Microsegmentation; Microsoft and Forescout as PEs)
 E1B4 (SDP; Appgate as PE)
 E2B4 (SDP and SASE; Broadcom (with Symantec products) as PE)
 E3B4 (SDP; F5 as PE)
 E4B4 (SDP, Microsegmentation and EIG; Broadcom (with VMware products) as PE)
 E1B5 (Microsegmentation and SASE; Palo Alto Networks as PE)
 E2B5 (SDP and SASE; Lookout and Okta as PEs)
 E3B5 (SDP and SASE; Microsoft as PE)
 E4B5 (SDP and Microsegmentation; AWS as PE)
 E1B6 (SDP and Microsegmentation; Ivanti as PE)
 E2B6 (SASE; Google as PE)
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 30

All the use cases were in scope. Summaries of the demonstration results for each of these builds can be
found in our supplemental SDP, Microsegmentation, and SASE Phase Summary Demonstration Results
documentation.
6.3.2  Demonstration Results in Full
Table 6-1 identifies the policy engines/policy decision points and types of architecture used in each
build. It also links to the online locations where each build architecture is described in detail, as well as
the online locations where the full demonstration results for each build can be found.
Table 6-1 Mapping of Builds to Online Details Regarding Architecture Descriptions and Functional
Demonstration Results
Build  Policy Engines/ Policy  ZTA Architecture  Links to Online  Links to Online
Decision Points  Instantiated  Details: Build  Details: Full
|     |     | Architecture,      | Demonstration  |
| --- | --- | ------------------ | -------------- |
|     |     | Technologies, and  | Results        |
Flow Diagrams
| E1B1  Okta Identity Cloud  | EIG Crawl  | E1B1 Build    | E1B1 Full      |
| -------------------------- | ---------- | ------------- | -------------- |
| Ivanti Access ZSO          |            | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
Results
| E2B1  Ping Identity Ping  | EIG Crawl  | E2B1 Build    | E2B1 Full      |
| ------------------------- | ---------- | ------------- | -------------- |
| Federate                  |            | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
Results
E3B1  Azure AD (Conditional  EIG Crawl  E3B1 Build  E3B1 Full
| Access)  |     | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
| -------- | --- | ------------- | -------------- |
Results
| E1B2  Zscaler ZPA Central  | EIG Run  | E1B2 Build    | E1B2 Full      |
| -------------------------- | -------- | ------------- | -------------- |
| Authority (CA)             |          | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
Results
| E3B2  Microsoft Azure AD  | EIG Run  | E3B2 Build    | E3B2 Full      |
| ------------------------- | -------- | ------------- | -------------- |
| (Conditional Access)      |          | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
Results
Microsoft Intune
Forescout eyeControl
Forescout eyeExtend
| E4B3  IBM Security Verify  | EIG Run  | E4B3 Build    | E4B3 Full      |
| -------------------------- | -------- | ------------- | -------------- |
|                            |          | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
Results
| E1B3  Zscaler ZPA Central  | SDP   | E1B3 Build    | E1B3 Full      |
| -------------------------- | ----- | ------------- | -------------- |
| Authority (CA)             |       | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
Results
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture  31

Build  Policy Engines/ Policy  ZTA Architecture  Links to Online  Links to Online
Decision Points  Instantiated  Details: Build  Details: Full
|     |     | Architecture,      | Demonstration  |
| --- | --- | ------------------ | -------------- |
|     |     | Technologies, and  | Results        |
Flow Diagrams
E2B3  Ping Identity  Microsegmentation  E2B3 Build  E2B3 Full
| PingFederate  |     | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
| ------------- | --- | ------------- | -------------- |
| Cisco ISE     |     |               | Results        |
Cisco Secure Workload
| E3B3  Microsoft Azure AD  | SDP and  | E3B3 Build  | E3B3 Full  |
| ------------------------- | -------- | ----------- | ---------- |
(Conditional Access)  Microsegmentation  Architecture  Demonstration
Results
Microsoft Intune
Microsoft Sentinel
Forescout eyeControl
Forescout eyeExtend
| E1B4  Appgate SDP  | SDP  | E1B4 Build    | E1B4 Full      |
| ------------------ | ---- | ------------- | -------------- |
| Controller         |      | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
Results
| E2B4  Symantec Cloud  | SDP and SASE  | E2B4 Build    | E2B4 Full      |
| --------------------- | ------------- | ------------- | -------------- |
| Secure Web Gateway    |               | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
| (Cloud SWG)           |               |               | Results        |
Symantec ZTNA
Symantec Cloud
Access Security Broker
(CASB)
| E3B4  F5 BIG-IP  | SDP  | E3B4 Build    | E3B4 Full      |
| ---------------- | ---- | ------------- | -------------- |
| F5 NGINX Plus    |      | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
Results
Forescout eyeControl
Forescout eyeExtend
| E4B4  VMware Workspace  | SDP,                | E4B4 Build    | E4B4 Full      |
| ----------------------- | ------------------- | ------------- | -------------- |
| ONE Access              | Microsegmentation,  | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
|                         | and EIG             |               | Results        |
VMware Unified
Access Gateway (UAG)
VMware NSX-T
| E1B5  Palo Alto Networks  | SASE and           | E1B5 Build    | E1B5 Full      |
| ------------------------- | ------------------ | ------------- | -------------- |
| NGFW                      | Microsegmentation  | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
Results
Palo Alto Networks
Prisma Access
| E2B5  Lookout SSE     | SDP and SASE  | E2B5 Build    | E2B5 Full      |
| --------------------- | ------------- | ------------- | -------------- |
| Okta Identity Clouds  |               | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
Results
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture  32

Build  Policy Engines/ Policy  ZTA Architecture  Links to Online  Links to Online
Decision Points  Instantiated  Details: Build  Details: Full
|     |     | Architecture,      | Demonstration  |
| --- | --- | ------------------ | -------------- |
|     |     | Technologies, and  | Results        |
Flow Diagrams
| E3B5  Microsoft Entra   | SDP and SASE  | E3B5 Build    | E3B5 Full      |
| ----------------------- | ------------- | ------------- | -------------- |
| Conditional Access      |               | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
| (formerly called Azure  |               |               | Results        |
AD Conditional Access)
Microsoft Security
Service Edge
| E4B5  AWS Verified Access  | SDP and  | E4B5 Build  | E4B5 Full  |
| -------------------------- | -------- | ----------- | ---------- |
and Amazon VPC  Microsegmentation  Architecture  Demonstration
| Lattice  |     |     | Results  |
| -------- | --- | --- | -------- |
E1B6  Ivanti Neurons for Zero  SDP and  E1B6 Build  E1B6 Full
Trust Access  Microsegmentation  Architecture  Demonstration
Results
| E2B6  Google CEP – Access  | SASE  | E2B6 Build    | E2B6 Full      |
| -------------------------- | ----- | ------------- | -------------- |
| Context Manager            |       | Architecture  | Demonstration  |
Results
| 7  Risk and Compliance Management  |     |     |     |
| ---------------------------------- | --- | --- | --- |
This section discusses risks addressed by the ZTA reference architecture and provides links to mappings
of ZTA security characteristics to CSF Subcategories, NIST SP 800-53 security controls, and NIST critical
software security measures. The mappings include both general ZTA logical component capabilities and
specific ZTA example implementation vendor technology capabilities.
7.1  Risks Addressed by the ZTA Reference Architecture
Conventional network security has focused on perimeter defense. Historically, most organization
resources have been located within and protected by the enterprise’s network perimeter, which tended
to be large and static. Subjects that are inside the network perimeter are often assumed to be implicitly
trusted and are given broad access to the resources within the network perimeter. Attempts to access
resources from outside the network perimeter, i.e., from the internet, are often subject to more scrutiny
than those originating from within. However, a subject can be compromised regardless of whether it is
inside or outside of the network perimeter. Once a subject is compromised, malicious actors—through
impersonation and escalation—can gain access to the resources that the subject is authorized to access
and move laterally within the network perimeter to access adjacent resources.
By protecting each resource individually and employing extensive identity, authentication, and
authorization measures to verify a subject’s requirement to access each resource, zero trust can ensure
that authorized users, applications, and systems have access to only those resources that they
absolutely have a need to access in order to perform their duties, not to a broad set of resources that all
happen to be within the network perimeter. This way, if a malicious actor does manage to gain
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture  33

unauthorized access to one resource, this access will not provide them with any advantage when trying
to move laterally to other nearby resources. To compromise those other resources, the attacker would
be required to figure out how to circumvent the mechanisms that are protecting those resources
individually because it is not possible to reach those resources from nearby compromised resources. In
this way, ZTA limits the insider threat because instead of having permission to access all resources
within the network perimeter, malicious insiders would only be permitted to access those resources
they require to perform their official roles.
In addition, once a subject is granted access to a resource, this access is often permitted to continue for
a substantial period of time without being reevaluated based on a defined policy. The access session is
often not monitored or subject to behavioral analysis, and the configuration and health of the devices
being used to access resources may be subject to initial, but not ongoing, scrutiny. So, if a subject does
manage to gain unauthorized access to a resource, the subject often has ample time to exfiltrate or
modify valuable information or further compromise the resource and/or use it as a point from which to
pivot and attack other corporate resources. ZTA limits these threats by performing continual verification
of a subject’s identity and authorization to access a resource. It may also perform behavioral analysis
and validation of each system’s health and configuration, and consider other factors such as day, time,
and location of subject and resource. Based on the organization’s defined policy, ZTA makes dynamic,
ongoing assessments of the risk of each access request in real-time to ensure it poses an acceptable
level of risk.
A number of trends, including cloud computing and remote work, have also introduced additional
security threats. The growth in cloud computing has meant that enterprises are now storing critical
resources (e.g., databases, applications, servers) in the cloud (i.e., outside of the traditional network
perimeter) as well as on-premises. As a result, these resources cannot be protected by the network
perimeter strategy. A new protection paradigm is needed that focuses on protecting resources
individually, no matter where they are located, so that they are not at risk of being subjected to security
policies that are not under organization control or not enforced consistently across all enterprise
resources. Often the clouds in which resources are hosted are multitenant, meaning that different
enterprises have authorized access to their own portions of the cloud infrastructure, with each tenant
reliant on the cloud service provider to enforce this separation. If a malicious actor were to figure out
how to subvert cloud security and move from one tenant’s account to the next, the organization’s
resources would be at risk. Use of ZTA to protect each resource individually serves as further assurance
that the resources will not be accessible to cloud users from other enterprises, nor will they be
accessible to users from within the enterprise who do not have a need to access them.
The growth of the remote workforce, as well as collaboration with partners and dependence on
contractors are other trends that are also challenging the conventional security paradigm. The subjects
requesting authorized access to resources may not necessarily be within the network perimeter. They
may be employees working from home or from a coffee shop’s public Wi-Fi via the internet, or a
partner, contractor, customer, or guest that requires access to some resources but must be restricted
from accessing other resources. By relying on strong identity, authentication, and authorization services
to determine precisely which resources a subject is authorized to access with respect to their role in or
relationship to the organization, ZTA can restrict subjects to accessing only those resources that they
have a need to access and ensure that they are not permitted to access any other resources.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 34

While implementing ZTA addresses many risks, it also has limitations. It cannot remove all risks, and the
ZTA implementation itself may introduce additional risks that need to be addressed. For more
information on the limitations of ZTA, see Section 5 of NIST SP 800-207.
7.2 ZTA Security Mappings
A mapping indicates that one concept is related to another concept. This publication introduces
mappings for ZTA cybersecurity functions, both those performed by the ZTA reference design’s logical
components (see Section 3.1) as well as those performed by specific technologies used in the project’s
builds.
Three categories of ZTA Security Mappings are available in our supplemental documentation:
 Subcategories from the NIST Cybersecurity Framework 1.1 (CSF 1.1) [2] and The NIST
Cybersecurity Framework 2.0 (CSF 2.0) [3]. Note that mapping for CSF 1.1 was done only for the
builds that were implemented before CSF 2.0 was finalized. Mapping for CSF 2.0 is done for all
builds.
 Security controls from NIST SP 800-53r5 (Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems
and Organizations) [4].
 NIST critical software security measures.
These mappings describe how the functions in our ZTA reference design are related to the NIST
reference documents within the context of our ZTA reference design. Within each category of mapping,
there is both a general mapping from the ZTA reference design logical components to the document
being mapped to (i.e., CSF, SP 800-53, or NIST critical software security measures), as well as a set of
collaborator-specific mappings from the ZTA technology component capabilities that are included in one
or more project builds to the document being mapped to (CSF, SP 800-53, or NIST critical software
security measures).
The mappings were developed to support two primary use cases:
1. Why should organizations implement ZTA? This use case identifies how implementing ZTA can
support an organization with achieving CSF Subcategories, SP 800-53 controls, and NIST critical
software security measures. This helps communicate to an organization’s senior management
that expending resources to implement ZTA can also aid in fulfilling other security requirements.
2. How can organizations implement ZTA? This use case identifies how an organization’s existing
implementations of CSF Subcategories, SP 800-53 controls, and NIST critical software security
measures can help support a ZTA implementation. An organization wanting to implement ZTA
might first assess its current security capabilities so that it can plan how to add missing
capabilities and enhance existing capabilities in order to implement ZTA. Organizations can
leverage their existing security investments and prioritize future security technology
deployment to address the gaps.
These mappings are intended to be used by any organization that is interested in implementing ZTA or
that has begun or completed a ZTA implementation.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 35

The project’s mappings use the supportive relationship mapping style defined in Section 4.2 of NIST
Internal Report (IR) 8477, Mapping Relationships Between Documentary Standards, Regulations,
Frameworks, and Guidelines: Developing Cybersecurity and Privacy Concept Mappings [9]. This style uses
three relationship types: Supports, Is Supported By, and Equivalent. Each relationship of type Supports
or Is Supported By also has a property assigned to it: Example of, Integral to, or Precedes.
8 Zero Trust Journey Takeaways
Based on our experience building example implementations in the lab, we recommend that an
organization that wants to deploy and implement zero trust embark on a journey that includes the
following steps:
 Discover and Inventory the Existing Environment
 Formulate Access Policy to Support the Mission and Business Use Cases
 Identify Existing Security Capabilities and Technology
 Eliminate Gaps in Zero Trust Policy and Processes by Applying a Risk-Based Approach Based on
the Value of Data
 Implement ZTA Components (People, Process, and Technology) and Incrementally Leverage
Deployed Security Solutions
 Verify the Implementation to Support Zero Trust Outcomes
 Continuously Improve and Evolve Due to Changes in Threat Landscape, Mission, Technology,
and Regulations
8.1 Discover and Inventory the Existing Environment
The first step any organization should take on its zero trust journey is to identify all of its assets by
determining what resources it has in its existing environment (hardware, software, applications, data,
and services). This may involve deploying tools that monitor traffic to discover what resources are active
and being accessed and used. It is necessary to have a complete understanding and inventory of the
organization’s resources because these are the entities that the ZTA will be designed to protect. If
resources are overlooked, it’s likely that they won’t be appropriately protected by the ZTA. They could
be vulnerable to exfiltration, modification, deletion, denial-of-service, or other types of attack. It is
imperative that all of the organization’s resources, whether on-premises or cloud-based, be identified
and inventoried.
Discovery tools that are used to identify organization resources may do so, for example, by monitoring
transaction flows and communication patterns. These tools may also be useful in helping the
organization identify the business and access rules that are currently being enforced and in identifying
access patterns that business operations require. Understanding how resources are accessed, by whom,
and in what context will help the organization formulate its access policies. In addition, once the
organization has begun deploying a ZTA, continuing to use the discovery tools to observe the
environment can be helpful to the organization as it audits and validates the ZTA on an ongoing basis.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 36

8.2 Formulate Access Policy to Support the Mission and Business Use
Cases
Once the organization has identified all the resources that it needs to protect and where they are, it may
formulate the policies that the ZTA will enforce to specify who is allowed to access each resource and
under what conditions. The access policies should be designed to ensure that permissions and
authorizations to access each resource conform with the principles of least privilege and separation of
duties. Typically, access to each resource will be denied by default, and access policies should be
formulated to authorize subjects with the least privileges required in order to perform their assigned
task on a resource that they are permitted to access. This requires understanding the types of users that
will be accessing resources and their access requirements, work locations, employment arrangements,
device types, and ownership models (e.g., BYOD and corporate-owned) because these will all influence
policy creation. Access authorizations may be constrained according to the location of the individual
requesting access, time of day, or other parameters that can further limit access without interfering with
organizational operations. All access policies should be informed by the criticality of the resource being
protected.
Initially, an organization may not have a clear sense of what resources each employee needs to access.
They may not be aware of which employees are accessing which resources or whether or not such
access conforms to the principles of least privilege and separation of duties. Information provided by the
tools that were used to discover resources can be useful in this regard. They can monitor access patterns
and produce a list of access flows and patterns that are observed. For the remote access example, an
organization transitioning from a full device VPN to per-app tunneling could first set up a full device
tunnel and observe traffic, then begin enabling only the traffic that is required for the user profile. The
organization’s security team can then examine this list to determine which access flows should be
permitted and then formulate access rules that permit them. Any observed access flows that should not
be permitted may be denied by default or explicitly prohibited in the access policy. By basing access
policy on observed access patterns, an organization reduces the chances that it will create overly
restrictive policies that interfere with its ability to conduct normal operations. By taking into
consideration the criticality of the data being protected when formulating the access policy, an
organization can help ensure that the protections being provided to a resource are commensurate with
its value.
One challenge that organizations may have when formulating policy is that their ZTA may consist of
numerous components that each perform policy engine and policy administrator roles. As a result,
access policy may not be centralized; rules may be distributed across numerous products, i.e., with some
rules configured in an endpoint protection component; some configured in ICAM components; other
rules configured in a network security component; and still other rules configured in a data security
component or other components. The lack of a single location where all policy rules can be centralized
may make it challenging for an organization to maintain an organized, complete, consistent
understanding of its access policy. To help manage their access policies, organizations should explicitly
keep track of not only what their access rules are but also where each of the rules is configured.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 37

8.3 Identify Existing Security Capabilities and Technology
If an organization is planning to install a ZTA into a greenfield environment, meaning that it will not have
any existing IT equipment or security capabilities that it will want to use or accommodate, this step
would not be needed. Most organizations embarking on a zero trust journey, however, will not be
starting from scratch. Instead, they will have an existing infrastructure and technology systems that
already perform security functions. Organizations will typically have at least network firewalls and
intrusion detection systems to help provide perimeter security, and identity and credential access
management systems that enable them to authenticate users and enforce authorized access based on
identity and role. They may have endpoint security systems protecting their laptops and/or mobile
devices to provide firewall protections and ensure that they are running required antivirus or other
security software. They may have tools for vulnerability and configuration management, log
management, and other security-related functions. They also likely have some sort of security
operations center.
An organization should identify and inventory its existing security technology components and
capabilities to understand what protections they already provide, then determine whether these
components should continue to provide these protections as part of the deployed ZTA or should be
repurposed. To save money, an organization will want to continue to use or repurpose as much of its
existing technology as possible without sacrificing security. Continuing to use existing technology will
require the organization to understand what potential zero trust components and products its existing
security technology will integrate with. Any additional components that are purchased specifically for
deployment in the ZTA should, ideally, integrate with the security technology components that the
organization already has and plans to continue to use.
8.4 Eliminate Gaps in Zero Trust Policy and Processes by Applying a Risk-
Based Approach Based on the Value of Data
Once an organization has inventories of the resources it needs to protect and the security capabilities it
already has, the organization is ready to begin planning its access protection topology, in terms of
whether and where its infrastructure will be segmented and at what level of granularity each resource
will be protected. The access topology should be designed using a risk-based approach, isolating critical
resources in their own trust zones protected by a PEP but permitting multiple lower-value resources to
share a trust zone. In designing its access protection topology, the organization will identify which PEP is
responsible for protecting each resource as well as what supporting technologies will be involved in
providing input to resource access decisions.
Initially, the organization’s network may not be well-segmented. In fact, before zero trust is
implemented, when the organization is still relying on perimeter-based protections, such a topology can
be thought of as the organization protecting all of its resources behind a single PEP, i.e., the perimeter
firewall. As the organization implements ZTA, it should segment its infrastructure into smaller parts.
Such segmentation will enable it to limit the potential impact of a breach or attack and make it easier to
monitor network traffic. In designing its access protection topology, the organization should apply
access control enforcement at multiple levels: application, host, and network.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 38

8.5 Implement ZTA Components (People, Process, and Technology) and
Incrementally Leverage Deployed Security Solutions
Once an organization has the following, it is ready to begin incrementally implementing ZTA:
 a good understanding of its current environment in terms of the resources it needs to protect
and the security capabilities that it already has deployed;
 formulated the access policies that are appropriate to support its mission and business use
cases; and
 designed its access protection topology to identify the granularity at which access to various
resources will be protected and the supporting technologies that will provide input to the PDP.
Given the importance of discovery to the successful implementation of a ZTA, the organization may
begin by deploying tools to continuously monitor the environment, if it has not done so already. The
organization can use these observations to audit and validate the ZTA on an ongoing basis.
In addition to discovery tools, the organization should ensure that any other baseline security tools such
as SIEMs, vulnerability scanning and assessment tools, and security validation tools are operational and
configured to log, scan, assess, and validate the ZTA components that will be deployed. Having security
baseline tools in place before the organization begins deploying new ZTA components helps ensure that
the ZTA rollout will be well-monitored, enabling the organization to proceed with high confidence that it
will understand the security ramifications of the incremental deployment as it proceeds.
Identity, authentication, and authorization are critical to making resource access decisions. Given that
making and enforcing access decisions are the two main responsibilities of a ZTA, the organization will
want to use its existing or a new ICAM solution as a foundational building block of its initial ZTA
implementation. The organization should strongly consider implementing MFA in a risk-based manner
for its users. An endpoint protection or similar solution that can assess device health and that integrates
with the ICAM solution may also be another foundational component of an initial ZTA deployment. An
initial ZTA based on these two main components will be able to use the identity and authorizations of
subjects and the health and compliance of requesting endpoints as the basis for making access
decisions. Additional supporting components and features can then be deployed to address an
increasing number of ZTA requirements. Which types of components are deployed and in what order
will depend on the organization’s mission and business use cases. If data security is essential, then data
security components will be prioritized; if behavior-based anomaly detection is essential, then
monitoring and AI-based analytics may be installed. The ZTA can be built incrementally, adding and
integrating more supporting components, features, and capabilities to gradually evolve to a more
comprehensive ZTA.
8.6 Verify the Implementation to Support Zero Trust Outcomes
The organization should continue to monitor all network traffic in real time for suspicious activity, both
to look for known attack signatures and patterns and to apply behavioral analytics to try to detect
anomalies or other activity that may be attack indicators. The organization should use deployed
discovery and other baseline security tools to audit and validate the access enforcement decision of the
ZTA it has provisioned, correlating known data with information reported by the tools. The organization
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 39

should perform ongoing verification that the policies that are being enforced, as revealed by the
observed network flows, are in fact the policies that the organization has defined. Periodic testing
should be performed across a variety of use case scenarios, including those in which the resource is
located on-premises and in the cloud, the requesting endpoint is located on-premises and on the
internet, the requesting subject is and is not authorized to access the requested resource, the
requesting endpoint is and is not managed, and the requesting resource is and is not compliant. In
addition, service-to-service requests, both authorized and unauthorized, should also be tested. The use
cases selected for testing should reflect those which most closely mirror how the organization’s users
access the organization’s resources on a day-to-day basis. Ideally, the organization can create a suite of
tests that it can use to validate the ZTA not only before deploying each new ZTA capability in the
incremental rollout process, but also on a periodic basis once the ZTA rollout is considered complete.
8.7 Continuously Improve and Evolve Due to Changes in Threat
Landscape, Mission, Technology, and Requirements
Once rolled out, the ZTA must continue to adapt to changing conditions. If technology components used
in the ZTA are upgraded or obsoleted by their manufacturer, they should be replaced. If innovative new
technologies become available, the organization should consider whether they could be integrated into
the existing ZTA to take advantage of new defensive tactics, techniques, and procedures that might
improve the organization’s security posture. If the organization’s security goals change, either as a result
of a shifting mission or changes in regulations, the ZTA’s policies and the ZTA itself may need to evolve
to best address these new goals.
In addition, the ZTA may need to adapt to a changing threat landscape. As new types of adversary
attacks become known and prevalent, the ZTA will need to add the threat signatures for these attacks to
the list of things it monitors for. Ideally the ZTA will also perform behavior-based monitoring that
enables it to detect anomalies that may signal zero-day attacks for which threat signatures are not yet
known. Behavior-based monitoring tools provide the ZTA with some degree of agility and readiness with
respect to its ability to detect attacks by adversaries who are constantly changing their tactics and
techniques. In any case, as the threat landscape changes, the organization’s CISO and security team
need to continually assess the ZTA’s topology, components, and policies to ensure that they are best
designed to address newly emerging threats. If the value of one or more of an organization’s resources
increases substantially, the organization may want to change how that resource is protected by the ZTA,
as well as what its access policies are.
As input to this ongoing process of validation and improvement, organizations should continuously
monitor their network and other infrastructure and update policies, technologies, and network
segmentation topologies to ensure that they remain effective. Creating a ZTA is not a one-time project
but an ongoing process. The organization’s CISO or other security team members should perform
ongoing validation of their ZTA access policies to ensure that they continue to be defined in a manner
that supports the organization’s mission and business use cases while conforming with the principles of
least privilege and separation of duties.
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 40

Appendix A List of Acronyms
AD Active Directory
API Application Programming Interface
BYOD Bring Your Own Device
CASB Cloud Access Security Broker
CISO Chief Information Security Officer
CRADA Cooperative Research and Development Agreement
CSF Cybersecurity Framework
DLP Data Loss Prevention
E1B1 Enterprise 1 Build 1
E1B2 Enterprise 1 Build 2
E1B3 Enterprise 1 Build 3
E1B4 Enterprise 1 Build 4
E1B5 Enterprise 1 Build 5
E1B6 Enterprise 1 Build 6
E2B1 Enterprise 2 Build 1
E2B3 Enterprise 2 Build 3
E2B4 Enterprise 2 Build 4
E2B5 Enterprise 2 Build 5
E2B6 Enterprise 2 Build 6
E3B1 Enterprise 3 Build 1
E3B2 Enterprise 3 Build 2
E3B3 Enterprise 3 Build 3
E3B4 Enterprise 3 Build 4
E3B5 Enterprise 3 Build 5
E4B3 Enterprise 4 Build 3
E4B4 Enterprise 4 Build 4
E4B5 Enterprise 4 Build 5
EDR Endpoint Detection and Response
EIG Enhanced Identity Governance
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 41

EPP Endpoint Protection Platform
IaaS Infrastructure as a Service
IaC Infrastructure as Code
ICAM Identity, Credential, and Access Management
IoT Internet of Things
IP Internet Protocol
IR Internal Report
IT Information Technology
ITL Information Technology Laboratory
MDM Mobile Device Management
MES Mobile Endpoint Security
MFA Multifactor Authentication
MTD Mobile Threat Defense
NCCoE National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence
NGFW Next-Generation Firewall
NIC Network Interface Card
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology
OT Operational Technology
PA Policy Administrator
PE Policy Engine
PEP Policy Enforcement Point
PIP Policy Information Point
SaaS Software as a Service
SASE Secure Access Service Edge
SD-WAN Software-Defined Wide Area Network
SDP Software-Defined Perimeter
SIEM Security Information and Event Management
SOAR Security Orchestration, Automation, and Response
SP Special Publication
SWG Secure Web Gateway
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 42

UEM Unified Endpoint Management
VLAN Virtual Local Area Network
VM Virtual Machine
VPN Virtual Private Network
WAN Wide Area Network
ZTA Zero Trust Architecture
ZTNA Zero Trust Network Access
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 43

Appendix B References
[1] Rose S, Borchert O, Mitchell S, Connelly S (2020) Zero Trust Architecture. (National Institute of
Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-207.
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-207
[2] National Institute of Standards and Technology (2018) Framework for Improving Critical
Infrastructure Cybersecurity, Version 1.1. (National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Cybersecurity White Paper (CSWP) NIST CSWP 6.
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.6
[3] National Institute of Standards and Technology (2024) The NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF)
2.0. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Cybersecurity
White Paper (CSWP) NIST CSWP 29. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.29
[4] Joint Task Force Interagency Working Group (2020) Security and Privacy Controls for
Information Systems and Organizations. (National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-53, Rev. 5.
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-53r5
[5] National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence, Internet of Things (IoT). Available:
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/iot
[6] National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence, Manufacturing. Available:
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/manufacturing
[7] National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence, Data Classification. Available:
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/data-classification
[8] “National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE) Zero Trust Cybersecurity: Implementing a
Zero Trust Architecture,” Federal Register Vol. 85, No. 204, October 21, 2020, pp. 66936-66939.
Available: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/10/21/2020-23292/national-
cybersecurity-center-of-excellence-nccoe-zero-trust-cybersecurity-implementing-a-zero-trust.
[9] Scarfone K, Souppaya M, Fagan M (2024) Mapping relationships between documentary
standards, regulations, frameworks, and guidelines: developing cybersecurity and privacy
concept mappings. (National Institute of Standards and Technology (U.S.), Gaithersburg, MD),
NIST Internal Report (IR) NIST IR 8477. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8477
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 44

Appendix C Change Log
In June 2025, the public comments received were addressed for the practice guide’s final version.
In December 2024, the following changes were made for the practice guide’s initial public draft:
 Added builds E2B6 and E4B5
In July 2024, the following changes were made for the practice guide’s fourth preliminary draft:
 Introduced a new manner of content delivery in two formats, one we refer to as the “High-Level
Document in PDF Format” and the other as the “Full Document in Web Format.”
 Added builds E2B4, E3B4, E4B4, E1B5, E2B5, E3B5, and E1B6
In July 2023, the following changes were made for the practice guide’s third preliminary draft:
 Added builds E1B3, E2B3, E3B3, E4B3, and E1B4
In December 2022, the following changes were made for the practice guide’s second preliminary draft:
 Added builds E2B1, E1B2, and E3B2
In July 2022, the first preliminary draft was created with:
 Created original document including builds E1B1 and E3B1
NIST SP 1800-35: Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture 45
